Branches 

Overview
Your roots are where you come from, they make you who you are and give you the foundation to reach towards the sky.
Your trunk is the present, it is the most robust and tangible part of you, where your past meets your future.
The branches above represent all the possible paths that lie in front of you. From the present, each is as likely as the next. You must understand these paths and grow towards your light.
Up to now, you have mapped out three potential futures, written out your story and iterated your life mission. Again, you are not tied to your mission, but having a clear mission statement will help you to build a clear identity to communicate with potential employers.
From here, you are going to reach out into the world and find your next place of work. I have mentioned before that the traditional method of finding work is not very effective. It is not the most efficient method of hiring, from the employer's standpoint, and has a relatively low success rate for employees (around 60% of workers in the United States are dissatisfied with their work).
You have a lot to do this week. In each activity, move quickly. Be confident that you are taking the right steps and take them. Nothing you do here is permanent. There will be activities that might seem incredibly important. I will do my best to point out when you need to complete the task, and when you need to dig deep and spend time on something. If you feel as though I am asking you to move quickly through something that deserves more attention, you will almost certainly be revisiting the material later in the program.
I am a firm believer in the idea that there is an excellent job for every person on this planet. When people struggle to find the correct employment, it is generally a result of a lack of understanding of the job market and a complete absence of trial. How can you possibly know that you are going to excel and enjoy something you have never tried? Maybe a job sounds great to you right now, but there is no guarantee that you will be able to withstand, enjoy, or find passion in the day to day grind of any position without useful insight.
The few systems set in place, which help ease the transition from education to the workforce (internships, apprenticeships, residencies),  are inundated with misleading expectations and outside influences.
Rather than following the beaten path, you are going to forge your own. In almost every profession, there are people who reach their positions in unorthodox ways. They have a cohesive identity story, and the grit to chase their dreams.
This week you are going to craft the image that you project into the world, find companies who are doing things you are interested in, find individuals doing the work you are interested in, and begin reaching out to those individuals.
You are going to exploit human nature to get your foot in the door. Remember, very few jobs are actually obtained through sending resume’s, and it is the last place that employers look for quality hires because it has the lowest success rate while being a high cost and high-risk process. Rather than approaching companies and asking for jobs outright, you are going to approach individuals with genuine curiosity and authenticity.
For clarity, I am not advising you not to apply for jobs, and if you already have interviews lined up, that is still a valuable process.
We will get more into the details as the week goes forward, for now, start by constructing and compiling the content you will project into the world.



Day 1 – Intentional Impressions
For much of this week, you are going to be using the spreadsheet labeled “Job Prospects.” It is designed to help organize all of the information you will be gathering and to help you use it to the greatest effect.
“Job Prospects” has three tabs. The first is best used to build your resume and presentation. You are going to craft your image into one that employers are looking for. To do that, you need to go and find out what exactly employers want and need. Then, reuse the descriptive language in the job posts to describe your characteristics honestly. Use the same adjectives and adverbs in the job descriptions to describe yourself.
When using the spreadsheet, work your way from left to right, and record as much accurate information as possible. Every column has a description embedded in the header. Float your pointer over the top of the column for additional directions and information.
Today you will research the specific way employers describe the position you are interested in, start to get an idea of what problems they need to have solved, and how you are equipped to solve those problems.
Then, you are going to write some content that will prove very useful tomorrow. The content does not need to be perfect, but it is important and deserves your full attention. On day 2, you will be asked to create a lot of material. The more you accomplish today, the easier tomorrow will be.

I. Initial Research
Start with your first job option, or with the interviews that you have scheduled.
1. First, find 2-10 job descriptions for your first job option from last week. You will see these descriptions on wanted ads and application forms. The most critical descriptions are for the jobs and companies you might be interested in. Unless you already have, hold off on applying to these positions, I want you to be more prepared when you approach the companies.
2. The first column calls for the career description. This is general; it is not the exact job title, but rather the field that the job is in.
3. The second column is where you record the exact job title from the job post.
4. In the third column, write the name of the company offering the position.
5. Next, copy and paste any relevant parts of the job description into the “job description” column.
6. In the next column (Adj. & Adv.), record the adjectives, adverbs, and specific skills that each ad uses.
7. Record all of the relevant experience and skills that you have. Use descriptive language directly from the job description. You will combine these with the descriptive language from your roots in week one soon. For now, use the language in each post.
8. Record the skills and experience that are called for, which you do not have. More often than not, the person writing the job post is listing all of the strengths of the last employee, and asking for the next person to be strong in all of their weaknesses as well. Of course, they are also probably looking to spend less money. Quite often, they are asking for more than is reasonable in the job post. There are plenty of ways to deal with these hurdles, and you will. For now, record what you lack.
9. In the final column, I want you do describe how this job fits into your story. What intangibles do you bring to the table? How can you solve the problems that this company faces better than anyone else? How would this particular position at this specific place of work fit into your overall story? You will further develop these ideas later on. For now, focus on finding an honest answer and moving on. Do not waste a ton of time on this part of the task. If it doesn’t fit, or if you are not sure, that is okay. We have not done the thorough research needed to know if this place of work will be the best fit for you, so do not stress the details here and now. Get something written, and keep moving.
That is all you need to record into the spreadsheet for now. We will come back for the “Potential Employers” tab and the “Networking” tab later in the week.
II. Writing Your Content
For this section, you will be rewriting your roots in with the specific intention of relaying your skills and experiences to employers. Use the descriptive language from the job descriptions found in part one of today.
1. What descriptive language stands out as universal or commonly used in the job descriptions from part one?






– Which descriptors stand out to you as being the best, while also describing you, your experience, or your skills, in a healthy positive light?






2. Credibility
– Look back through your roots, and record everything you have done that supports your credible claim to the position you are seeking.






– Prioritize these skills and experiences according to how important they are to your successful execution of the tasks described in the job description. Use the “Ranking Grid” if you need to.






3. What would be the title of the job that you want most?




– Are there any keywords or phrases you think you should use in this job title?






4. Rewrite your credible traits using these guidelines:
a) simple past & simple present tense
b) phrases, not sentences – start with an active verb, the subject is assumed to be you
c) contain roughly one keyword (from job descriptions)
d) are quantifiable whenever possible
example:
Developed software which increased sales team efficiency by 6%
Grew publication reach from 5,000 readers per month to 20,000 readers per month in the first six months
Maintained function of 458 machine units for five years with 0 significant failures












5. Write a short (3-5 sentences) summary of your experience. This summary should draw on your roots and how well the position fits into your identity story. Your aim is for the position to seem as though it is the next logical step in your story.










6. In 10 words or less, explain why you are the perfect fit for this job and career.






7. Summarize your identity story and professional achievements in 2-3 sentences.





8. Write a clear and conclusive personal introduction in 6-12 words. (This is your headline.)

Day 2 – Constructing the Projection
Up to this point, you have been analyzing your capabilities, deciding your trajectory, and preparing the information you are going to use to achieve your dreams. From this day onwards, you will be explicitly chasing those dreams.
Now the rubber meets the road.
Today, you will use the information you have gathered to tell your identity story in every reasonable and necessary format. You will, of course, be creating a resume using the descriptors and phrases we have covered so far. You will also be addressing the image that potential employers and contacts will find when they do their research on you — namely, your Facebook profile, linked in, twitter, and what appears when they google you.
You are going to need at least one professionally acceptable photograph: Upper torso, face, presentable for your profession, no alcohol or drugs, preferably alone, with good lighting, and genuine expression. You need to update every single profile picture you have. They will all show up in a thorough search. You do not need to update your music streaming service with a suit and tie, but it does need to be an acceptable picture. These pictures are the images that people are going to associate with your name. You want it to be professionally flattering.
You do not need a social media presence. You also do not need to be overly active on social media. If you are tweeting 200 times a day, when are you working? For our purposes, think of social media as a tool. It should be used to present a carefully crafted image to the world and to engage with and grow your professional and personal networks.

I. Google
1. Open an incognito window in Chrome, or the equivalent in your preferred browser. Google your name. Google your name and city. Google any identifying traits someone might use to find you.
2. For all of the above, you need to scour both the “all” results and the image results. Follow the links to see what people can find about you. It is common to find pictures or websites that have not been used in years. Go through everything you can find and either update the images and the content available or delete the account altogether.
3. For any unsavory posts that display you in a less than ideal manner: untag yourself, ask the original poster to take the photo down, or take it down yourself. You can contact Google to remove the image, but that is not the best route. You might consider trickling more ideal pictures onto your preferred social media network on your own, with family, and through friends. This approach takes time, and might not be the best investment right this moment. Extracurricular activities show a well-rounded person. Intoxicated pictures do not.

II. Facebook
Someone is going to find your Facebook profile. You want it to be presentable. If you have not used Facebook in 10 years, you still have a profile. If you have deleted your profile, you still have a profile. The only time you should not be editing what you have on your Facebook profile is if you have never used the website or application.
1. Update your profile picture. Comb through all your profile pictures. You don’t need to show people how drunk you were in college, or the last New Year for that matter. Many people have had Facebook for a decade or more, make sure you are okay presenting your pictures from the past if you are going to keep them. Your photographs tell a story about you, make sure they tell the story you want, and need, them to tell. While you are here, address your cover photo as well.
2. Check your privacy settings. Make sure that you are comfortable with them. I suggest that you be comfortable adding professional contacts to your friend list.
3. Accounting for your privacy settings, and the fact that you will be gaining new friends, edit what you have posted. While political expression is your right, extreme views of any sort can be a turn off for employers, unless of course, you are going to work in politics. Do not engage in bigotry and discrimination. You have every right to have your opinions and feelings but think carefully about what information you are presenting to your potential employers. Most workplaces are made up of diverse people with differing views, be aware of that fact. The last thing I want is for you to find the perfect job, and then be denied an opportunity because your employer is turned off by something you said on Facebook. You can delete posts, and you can set them so that only you can see them. If you do not know how to do those things, use google to learn how.
4. Update your “about” section with a summary of your identity story.
5. Update your “intro” with a 6-10 phrase summarizing your identity.
6. Edit the rest of your “about” section to be up to date, and accurate. Be intentional about what you choose to share. You do not need to share everything.
7. Go through the photographs you are tagged in and the pictures you have posted. Make sure that they are either private or professionally appropriate.
III. Resume/CV
Resume if you are looking in the US, Curriculum Vitae everywhere else.
The role of a resume or CV is twofold. The first job of the resume is to avoid the trash bin. The second is to leave a positive impression on the employer. While you want your resume to represent your story, it is not going to give a complete account of who you are. Many companies use software to filter the tens, hundreds, or thousands of resumes they receive.
There are two main things that you will do to get past automated filters.
The first one you have already started. Use keywords and phrases listed in the job descriptions for those positions. The worker who creates the job post is almost certainly in communication with whoever is setting up the resume filter, and they are looking for the same attributes.
The second immediate thing you are going to do is apply to smaller companies. Smaller companies tend to have less competition for open jobs, and therefore, it is easier to stand out from the crowd.
On Day One of this week, you should have written everything you need to express on your resume. You and I have discussed how to approach your resume. I strongly suggest using a resume template from “Canva” or a website like “Canva.” When choosing your template, be sure that it sends the message you want it to send. The layout of your resume is an extension of the story you are telling.
Use keywords, but do not overstuff your resume with them.
Quantify any work that can be quantified.
Avoid bland statements that are difficult to prove. Everyone is a “hard worker,” and everyone is “innovative.” Rather than expressing your characteristics, use examples that demonstrate those characteristics. You are not a “capable leader”; you “increased team efficiency by 30% in 3 months with human first management techniques”.
You want to pass the screening first. Then you want to engage curiosity. Your resume should lead interviewers into asking about your most significant achievements.
Draft a presentable resume using all the skills you have learned up to this point. Tell your story. Use keywords from job posts. Describe your skills and experience using quantifiable facts. Be clear and concise. Every line should be in simple tense.
Avoid explanations and do not sell yourself. Leave both of those things for the interviews when you get them. Focus on what you can do, avoid the things you cannot do. Use your potential employers’ vocabulary.
Do not include references.
This is a draft, an iteration. It is not the final copy. We will discuss your resume further at our next meeting. Update your resume periodically throughout your life.
No resume is perfect. You are only trying to sell the person who is going to hire you. So, don’t be afraid to be you, and be sure to tell your story while relying on facts and figures.

IV. LinkedIn
LinkedIn is an excellent tool for finding opportunities, networking, and engaging in your professional community. You are going to use this tool. If you do not have a LinkedIn profile, Create one now and use the following guidelines to set everything up correctly.
Visit your LinkedIn profile. Click on the Edit pencil.
1. Update your profile picture. Focus the picture on your face, from the shoulders up. It needs to be clean and clear. Be professionally presentable. Set the “visibility” to all LinkedIn members or public.
2. Fill in the headline section with number 8 from section II day 1 week 3 (yesterday).
3. List your current position if you are looking to move forward in your field. If you are dramatically switching fields, you are “aspiring to be” title you are looking to have in your next job.
4. Complete your profile with as much relevant information as you see fit.
5. Return to your profile. In the top right corner, you can edit your public profile and URL. Change your LinkedIn Profile to include your full name. If you have a common name, use a common-sense abbreviation.
6. Along the right side of the “edit” screen, adjust the visibility of each of your sections as you see fit. I suggest being as visible as possible. You have nothing to hide, and want to leave good impressions, which requires making some impact.
7. Take the time to input all of your relevant work experience and your education. Use the same language as your resume. Be honest, but be certain to use the keywords you found in job descriptions yesterday. Do not “stuff” keywords, you want the profile to be natural, but targeted.
8. Fill out your education and skills on LinkedIn.
9. List any professional websites you run, blogs that help establish your legitimacy as an expert in your field, etc.
10. Request to join 3-5 groups in the field that you are looking to enter.
Day 3 – Networking
Breaking Into the Hidden Job Market
Almost everything in life is, at its core, based on relationships. Notably, and most importantly for our cause, finding and securing a job. Every step of this program, of any job program, is essentially an exercise in communicating who you are to other people and communicating to them that you are the best fit for a given position. Success in any particular job is largely based upon relationships: relationships with your boss, your coworkers, your clients, other branches of your organization, and so on.
Relationships hold the keys to the hidden job market. Even if you already have a pending interview, this is the absolute best way to prepare for that interview, and it will give you a unique edge over your competition. In the coming days and weeks, you will be acting upon everything you learn today. You are more than welcome to start working upon what you learn as soon as possible, but make sure you read through and understand this entire lesson first.
Up to now, you have expressed and recorded your experience, established your professional identity, and crafted the image that you project into the world. From this point onward, use that projection to reach out into the world and land your next job. When the time comes, reach out to, and have conversations with, professionals in your target industry.
With my help, you will identify people who currently or previously do the job that you want to be doing and have genuine conversations with them. There are several reasons that networking in this particular way works so incredibly well.
First, an interview is a conversation. In the most successful interviews, the candidate and the employer build a sense of rapport. Interviewer and interviewee come to find that they have the same goals, can fill each other’s needs, and have a good chance of building a productive and pleasant relationship.
Second, is that the employers’ preferred method of finding quality hires, the method that yields the most consistent results, is not sifting through resumes, but rather hiring someone that they know. For better or worse, the classic phrase, “it is not what you know, but whom you know” is very real, and very effective. Rather than being a martyr to the flawed cause of using the traditional method, do your future employer a favor and do the extra networking.
Third, by embracing the proper mindset (curiosity, bias to action, reframing, awareness, and radical collaboration), you will learn how real people doing your dream job found their way to where they are.
Fourth, you can use psychology to your advantage. When you approach people asking for a job, they automatically start screening you through that filter and assessing whether or not they can afford to bring you on as an employee. If they don’t already think they have room for you, they will almost certainly shut you down from the start. Further, they are less likely to send you in a helpful direction. By starting the conversation with genuine curiosity, focusing on them and their achievements, you are opening them up to build a real relationship. Relationships lead to opportunities.
Fifth, you are doing vital research while you are networking. The best way to know if a job is a good fit for you is to do the job. If you are able to, you can find internship or shadowing opportunities through direct contacts. The next best way to know is to speak to people who do that job. Networking conversations and actual time spent at the place of work provide the opportunity to get inside information about each of the companies and places of work in your field, directly from the source. You will uncover a treasure of knowledge that is otherwise unavailable to you. You will learn about alternative paths into your desired work.
This method of networking is tried and true by the best job programs in the world. Why? Because it works. You may have to speak to 50+ people before finding the perfect fit. Stick to it, and it is guaranteed to work. Build relationships with the people in your industry to find otherwise hidden opportunities.
There is little better preparation for an interview than speaking directly with the people who do the work you are looking to do. Not only are you gaining valuable knowledge about the actual work, but you are building relationships inside your industry and practicing for your interview. In every conversation you have, during your networking and the actual interview process, you will be using the same skills. The more practice you get, the more prepared you will be.
So, let’s dive right in. First, I will address mindset and how it benefits you. Next, I will discuss the actual practice and art of conversation. After that, I will explain everything you will be looking to gain from these conversations. Then, I will explain the process you will use to build your network. I will wrap up by covering how to prepare for each meeting. At the very end of the day, I have included some bonus information on Negotiation.
Your goal goes far beyond securing and executing interviews. Your goal is to be offered multiple quality jobs. Multiple quality offers will provide you with the best odds of choosing a successful, fruitful, and rewarding place of work. It’s time to go out and find those job offers.
I. Mindset in Practice
Everything up to this point and everything you do moving forward depends on your mindset. People talk a lot about the power of positivity and the idea of persistence. I, like many others, have looked into these ideas and done my part to live by them. Positivity provides decent direction, but it lacks depth as a rule to live by.
While looking for something more practical, I came upon the “designer mindset” laid out by Bill Burnett in his book “Designing Your Life.” I have mentioned these ideals in brief throughout the course. Now I’ll elaborate the five mindsets, the logic behind them, and how to implement each one effectively.

What It Isn’t
Before diving into the meat of these mindsets, I would like to explain what they are not. I do not want you to fabricate stories about yourself and your capabilities. The line between conducting proper research to prepare for your audience and falsely presenting yourself as their savior can be thin.
Authenticity is a tricky subject. The most potent stories resonate with the audience, often engaging in emotional realities shared by the protagonist and the audience. The tale of reinventing yourself is excellent, but you have to practice what you preach. Your story, your networking, must be genuine.
People generally love a hero’s tale. The wonder and inspiration encapsulated by venturing into the unknown, overcoming a series of trials, suffering a significant loss, overcoming odds, and returning to face the world born anew are classic and effective. Yet, if it is false, then it is all for nothing. I am not asking you to stay who you have always been. I am telling you to be honest in your storytelling.
Everybody has a hero’s story of their own. What you should have done, and should still be doing, is identifying your hero’s story. Although we are generally the protagonist of our own story, many people have a hard time picturing themselves as a genuine hero. Authenticity does not mean remaining the same person. It means owning your journey.
Every person reading this is at a different point in their hero’s journey. Some overcome great odds at very young ages while others never get the chance to see their journey through. Part of living a fulfilled life means identifying the person you wish to be and striving to be that person, not through sleight of hand or a web of lies, but with personal growth, persistence, and grit. It is entirely possible to swindle your dreams into reality, but what I want for you is a reality built with solid foundations. I am not here to teach you how to lie or be a charlatan. My dream is to help you identify and harness your potential and then achieve it.
Your journey will last until your dying breath. Your life is a story that you get to create. There are surely outside forces that affect you, carefully choose how to react to them. Be an active player rather than a spectator, and you increase the odds of achieving the life of your dreams.
Awareness
Everything discussed so far involves some level of awareness. Be aware of your self, others, and your environment. For this particular part of your journey, be aware that finding and landing your dream job is a process.
Being aware of your daily environment requires active involvement. Awareness is the difference between being a participant and a player. To affect outcomes and push the needle in your favor, start by being aware. To start, try being as present in each moment as possible. Use your senses to observe reality as it is presented to you, and don’t assume anything. Be aware of what you see, smell, hear, taste, and feel.
By assuming nothing and approaching everything as a detached observer, you can become aware of details you and others otherwise overlook. Awareness goes beyond what is immediately obvious and peers into the unknown and the hidden. The sleight of hand used to perform magic tricks is an excellent example of manipulating awareness and pushing the limits of an audience’s attention. You have to search somewhere you have never looked to see something you have never seen.
Be open to the concept that everyone is operating according to their own code of ethics, their own story, and their own motives. Keep in mind that everyone is their own hero. When you are in a meeting with someone, listen for their values and their needs. By being aware of other people’s needs, in the context of their personal and professional narrative, it is easier to understand your contacts and build genuine rapport.
Always listen for the purpose of understanding, not for the sake of answering. If you have an idea or comment while someone else is talking, let that idea go, let it pass. Holding onto your idea keeps you from engaging with what the person is saying. They may answer your question before you ask, but you can only know if you are listening and aware. (You should be prepared for every meeting with a pen and paper. Take quick notes, do not write full ideas. Sorting through an entire concept steals your attention.)
Self-awareness can be a challenging prospect for many. Aim to be aware of your flaws, your strengths, and your presence. Gain self-awareness by interviewing yourself, asking people close to you the same questions, and comparing and contrasting the answers, sifting through biases in search of the truth. If you are wanting for ideas, read your horoscope or take a free personality quiz. Use the results as a springboard; no test can flawlessly describe who you are. Think very carefully about what is accurate and what is inaccurate, the pieces of your personality that are missing, and any feelings or thoughts you might have about the entire topic.
Others can provide a perspective that you might not consider. When you ask others about your tendencies, be aware of the fact that you might not like what you hear. Prepare yourself to be open and receptive to their criticism. Ask your helper to balance positive feedback with criticism, and do not let them tear into you incessantly. You will not learn anything if you are emotionally inflamed, there is no reason to subject yourself to more criticism than you can handle with a level head. Criticize yourself with the goal of self-improvement. More can be gained from a calm and inquisitive mind than from a state of paranoia or judgment.
Write out a series of questions before interviewing yourself or others. You want to understand your conversation habits, how well you listen, your favorite things to talk about, your greatest strengths, your critical weaknesses, as well as your motives. The goal is to understand yourself the way you know your favorite character from a book, movie, or series. Learn to predict yourself and become aware of your decision making patterns.
Another useful tactic is to search through your MBTI or horoscopes. Many of these online tools are flawed, but they can provide a helpful starting point for self-reflection. As in Week 1, use the advice as a way to reflect on what is true and what is false.
Finally, be aware of the process, whatever your process might be. In seeking your dream job, that means being aware that this is difficult, and no, you should not give up. Take time to write down everything that brought you to this point and all the possibilities in front of you. Ask if you are taking steps towards your goal each day. Write down all your questions, all your worries, all your hopes, and all your dreams. Observe actions from the perspective of goals and work to understand how the past flows into the future.
Do your best not to mistake the trees for the forest. It is easy to get bogged down in the individual steps on your journey. Taking time to lift your head, and see where you are along your path will help to keep you motivated while ensuring that you are, in fact, still going the right direction. Do your best to make sure that every step you take follows your compass. Creating and living a coherent story takes intention and awareness.
Curiosity
Curiosity is very similar to existing in the present moment. Meaning that when you are focused on the present, not on what will happen next, not on your past, and not on external drama, you are likely to be more engaged and therefore more curious. Recall from week one that engagement is our measure for flow, which is when people are at their best and most productive.
To be genuinely curious, you must be genuinely present. It is good and proper to prepare a list of questions for an interview, but if you are not present in the interview you cannot ask excellent and relevant questions, you cannot build rapport, and you cannot build a fortuitous relationship.
Curiosity is a trait often exemplified by children. It is the desire to learn, to discover, and to explore. Curiosity breeds innovation, which every growing company is seeking in some fashion. Being curious in your life means being fully engaged with what is happening when it is happening. Curiosity is thirst, and discovery is water.
Ideally, this will not be a chore for you. Aligning your work values and your life values should provide you with some motivation to do the work you are seeking. If you are seeking employment that will fulfill you, you should want to care about every aspect of that work. You are looking for a job, which means that you have questions that need to be answered. The most meaningful answers you can find are to questions that you ask for yourself. You have to want to learn. I can lead a horse to water, but I cannot force it to drink. I can show you the door, but I cannot force you to walk through the door. Curiosity is the drive and the will to drink the water, to walk through the door.
Curiosity is awareness. Many opportunities in life go unnoticed. How many times have you lost your keys or your glasses only to find them right under your nose? Chances are, you were distracted by something external or by the stress of the situation itself. By letting the pressure of the situation consume your attention, you fail to notice what you are looking for when it is presented. Curiosity embraces the innocence of the situation and absorbs reality as it is given rather than as we seek it.
Curiosity means listening for an answer when you ask a question. The right question can lead to the most rewarding opportunities, but only if you genuinely listen to the response. Going through the motions is not good enough here. You must be willing to learn. You must be thirsty for information. Being curious means admitting your shortcomings and asking for help. It comes from a place of humility. A curious mind is keenly aware that it does not know the answers it seeks.
A curious mind must truly process and chew on new information. Throughout life, we build a system of algorithms in our minds to help us process information. Most of those algorithms are formed in our childhood, or at least while our brain is still developing. For tens of thousands of years, that was more than enough. When the average human life span was 32 years, 27 years of learning was excellent. Today, we exist in a world with more information exposure than ever before. By no fault of any individual, our natural inclinations simply are not good enough. To be open to new information, you have to make an effort to force the door open. You have to over-ride your programming, choose the hard road, and manually sift through new information. Without making an effort to do so, you might discard the gold you are looking for without ever knowing you had it.
For you, curiosity means seeking people with genuine interest. Seek and find stories that will help you on your path. Do not go through the motions when networking. They have answers, advice, history, and connections, which can all help you. One, likely more, of the interactions you have, will open doors for you.
Emotion is more deeply tied to memory than thoughts are. The most impactful impressions are emotional. We remember people we hate far longer than we remember why we hate them. Words cannot quite capture the meaning of love. Leave someone with a positive emotional memory attached to your name, and that emotion will influence and eventually dominate the memory.
By asking for advice and following through with curiosity, you make it easier to form a relationship with the person you are interviewing. Attempt to engage them on their history and their accomplishments, asking them what they did and how they did it.
Come prepared with a set of topics, you could even write out some questions explicitly, but be sure to ask questions about any new information that comes up. Being prepared is essential, but follow the natural flow of the conversation. Use prepared prompts to keep the conversation alive if need be. Do not cut off a live topic unless you are running out of time.
Bias to Action
Always lean towards taking action. When the options are failure, success, and doing nothing, always choose action. There is no better teacher than failure. The only wrong answer is inaction. Be biased toward taking action.
You make thousands of decisions every day. Every decision ends in some action or inaction. Every action or inaction is a step. Life is a journey of a thousand miles. Your values give you a compass to navigate the journey. Pay attention to where each step takes you and keep taking steps.
Think of each decision like an equation.
Current Situation = C
Decision = D
Future Situation = F
Reality = R
(C * D) + R = F
Good scientific hypotheses utilize constants and a single variable in order to identify and measure reliable results.
To get the best understanding of your current situation, balance objective logic with any feelings or inclinations you might have. While logic dominates the current worldview, science is showing that the body has several layers of processing and storing information. Many of the most reliable tools we have lie outside of the frontal cortex (go with your heart & trust your gut are more than just idioms).
Reality here refers to entropy and the general rule of chaos in the universe. Reality is anything but predictable, always expect the best and prepare for the worst. Reality is an uncontrollable variable.
Which leaves decisions, the closest thing to control and influence over this equation that anyone has. Even when accounting for the interference of reality, choices play a huge role because this equation runs hundreds or thousands of times a day. Making coherent decisions, following your value compass, living with a code, a mission, or a purpose provides the consistency needed for your bias to action to have a significant impact on future situations and realities.
Running the equation with two variables creates chaos. Consistent, intentional decision making ushers that chaos in a direction. The more active you are in your decision making, the more control you have in this process. You can never have complete control, but relentless action will yield results.
Most of the time, people do not recognize the fruits of their labor. The amount of time it takes to notice the effects of our decisions is just long enough that most people forget the decision-making process. This disconnect creates three problems: it is easy to give up before we see results, it is difficult to learn from our decisions, and we rarely give ourselves proper credit. Being biased to action solves all three. Understand your compass, and always take action. Trust that being intentional with the “D” in your equation gives you better odds than non-action.
The simple truth is that there is no way to know the future. However, you can do everything in your power to push future realities towards your favor. The more action you take, the harder you work, the more influence you have over your future. Be biased to action.
Reframing
Reframing is possibly the most powerful mindset in the bunch. Reframing means observing a situation, finding the most useful perspective possible, and using that perspective to your advantage. Failure is a chance to learn. Being broken means rebuilding stronger. Devastation clears the path for new growth. Practicing reframing can be impersonal, indifferent, and even detached. Leave behind emotional involvement to see the silver lining, turn every obstacle into an opportunity.
Through reframing, it is possible to control the current situation as much as possible. Take, for instance, the reality of addiction. An addict in recovery may have massive gaps in their employment history and could be considered unreliable. Fighting addiction means practicing rigorous authenticity, surrendering to the outcome, and doing uncomfortable work; which are all highly prized soft skills that have the power to drive entire companies to success. Reframe a lack of work experience to a complete commitment to honest hard work.
Every path worth walking encounters rejection. “No” is a crushing word and reality for many. For others, it is rife with possibility and opportunity, a chance to learn, a chance to grow, a necessary step on the road to success. View rejection with enthusiasm. Turn your most significant obstacle into your greatest strength. Rejection in the job market is an opportunity to learn. Rather than taking it personally, ask for guidance and referrals. While you might not be the right fit for that position, the person who just shut one door could open up the next door for you. While there are no guarantees, overcoming negative momentum is worth reframing the situation in and of itself.
Many great minds have left us with excellent quotes about overcoming failure. What is most important is that you learn from your failures. Take each step as an opportunity to adjust your world view according to the decisions you made and how they affected your situation. Reframing means actively altering your perspective. Do not blindly make decisions without regard for how and why they do or do not work.
Reframing is the art of marketing and sales. While these might not be your expertise, they encapsulate the job search reasonably well. Present your skills in the most palatable design possible to close the deal with one lucky employer. The more compelling your marketing, the stronger your sales will be. Job seekers often overlook their most valuable traits. Every person has a heroic story, but most people don’t see how they are a hero. Every job seeker is the perfect fit somewhere. Some fits are more challenging to find.
Practice reframing as often as you possibly can. Change problems into opportunities. Spend the extra energy to change how you view the world as often as possible. Just like training the body, the more practice you have reframing problems, the easier it will get. As reframing gets easier, you will be able to change your perspective on more substantial issues with more impact. Energy invested reframing now will pay off tenfold when your path is easier to navigate, and rejection becomes motivation. Luckily for you, if you have been following your schedule, you have been practicing reframing failure since week one.
Reframing is the soul of innovation, creativity, and flexibility.
Radical Collaboration
The last piece of mindset advice is to embrace radical collaboration. In other words, talk to people. Remember that an interview is a two-way conversation; you must collaborate with potential employers, and networking leads to the benefit of everyone involved. The more genuine rapport you build, the more you will get out of your interactions with professionals and peers. The result of radical collaboration is greater than the sum of the individual parts.
Further, for many of the activities in this program, you are asked to talk to peers. Group brainstorming is extremely useful when used correctly. Meaning, it is not the sort of activity that will be successful with half effort. It must be a radical effort.
The goal of brainstorming sessions is to generate new ideas. New ideas flourish in open and accepting environments. Creating open and inviting environments means going past social norms, setting clear boundaries and guidelines for your groups, and taking a leap of faith. There is no guarantee that the people you ask to help you will be the best for the job, but after careful consideration on your part, there is only one way to find out. Approaching any situation with the notion that it will not work before it has even begun, is a sure-fire path to an unsuccessful venture. Foster open-mindedness, for it is precious and fleeting.
In general, always ask for help. While some see asking for help as a weakness, it is, in fact, a great show of strength. Be aware of what you do not know and seek the answers you need. This integrity builds trust between people and lays solid foundations for fruitful relationships. Generally speaking, people enjoy sharing what they know. That does not mean that everyone will tell you everything they know.
The basis of economic activity is social interaction. Finding a job means finding people to collaborate with. Approach the process of networking and collaboration with excitement and vigor. Find the people you want to grow with by asking genuine questions aimed at solving problems through radical collaboration.
II. The Art of Conversation and Building Rapport
There is nothing in the world quite like an excellent conversation. The kind that leaves you in a euphoric glow, the ones you return to when your mind wanders years later. The best conversations can be had between complete strangers or a couple of 65 years. People from entirely different backgrounds, even people who are at odds with one another, share amazing interactions every day.
Networking is intimately related to conversation. If this fact is daunting for you, remember that most people in your target field are similar to you. There is a fair likelihood that the people you encounter are socially similar to you. Ideally, you are going to share an interest (the field you want to work in) with each contact. Everyone you encounter holds some nugget of truth that can help you on your journey, and every person is perfectly capable and good enough to build the relationships necessary to bridge between the present and the desired future.
The classic advice for conversations and interviews includes eye contact, nodding along with the speaker, summarizing what you hear to ensure clarity, and coming prepared with a list of questions. For the most part, it’s poor advice focused on the symptoms rather than the root. The secret? Be present and pay attention. Embody the mindsets listed above. Approach them with genuine curiosity and the desire to collaborate. Be aware of their needs, and listen for any clues they might give you. Always listen first.
First impressions are important. First impressions are mostly made up of emotional impacts (did you like the person, or not?). Leave your encounters with a positive emotional feeling attached to your name, and they will likely forget the small mistakes you made along the way. Professional flattery is serviceable, and flattery via asking for advice will often get you in the door. However, once you are sitting down with someone, building real rapport takes a bit more than simple flattery.
Of all the great advice out there, I have found that Celeste Headlee covers the most critical aspects with her list of ten guidelines to conversations and interview.
Be interested in other people. Everyone has something brilliant to share. Keep your mouth shut, your mind open, and you will never be let down.
1. Don’t Multitask
Multi-tasking isn’t real. No human can genuinely do two things at once. Many people try to switch quickly back and forth between tasks, which inhibits their ability to perform either task. Focus on one thing at a time.
When you are talking with someone, be present in the conversation. Do not engage with technology, resist the urge to daydream, and keep yourself grounded in the situation at hand. Find your way out if you are done with the conversation. Don’t waste the other person’s time by disrespecting them.
With an exception for extreme emergencies, do not look at or pick up your phone.
2. Don’t Pontificate
The goal is to collaborate, which means you have to invite dialogue. Don’t give speeches that are uninvited. Conversations require multiple participants. If you want to talk to yourself, do it on a blog or in a journal, don’t waste other people’s time.
Always be willing to learn something new. Every idea that you do put forward could open up your cohort to information that could change your life, be prepared to hear what they have to say. Set your ego aside before every conversation you have. The more open you are, the more open the other person feels in the discussion, the more they will share with you. The goal of networking is to learn from other people and build relationships. Approach every conversation as a student ready to learn.
Everyone is an expert at something, be approachable enough for people to show you their expertise.
3. Use Open-Ended Questions
Open-ended questions generally start with a “w” (who, what, when, where, how), and lack specifics. You want to know what the other person thinks, so don’t give them a place to start their answer. Force them to think about what to say, and to craft a genuine response. This process accomplishes two things; it shows them that you value their input while allowing them to open up to you. Let people show you how they think, don’t make any assumptions.
BAD: “Did you learn about perseverance and teamwork when you led your high school basketball team to the championship in 2005?
BETTER: What life lessons did you learn from playing basketball in high school?
In the first example, the question gives the target possible answers. The target could feel like their honest answer isn’t as good as the suggestions, or that it is easier to say, “yes” than it is to provide honest reflection. Further, it is entirely possible that the most significant lessons learned from that part of the target’s life didn’t come during the championship run. The second example specifies what type of answer is being sought without providing any potential outs. The question has a specific target while remaining open-ended.
Every time you ask a question, wait for the other person to answer. Sometimes people have to think about what to say. Do not jump in with another question or any suggestions. Adding more questions is confusing. Suggesting answers gives the person an excuse not to provide a thorough and genuine response. Both are disrespectful and show the other person that you don’t care about what they have to say.
4. Go With The Flow
Great ideas with inevitably occur to you while someone else is talking. Either quickly make a short note of them, or let them go entirely.
These ideas can completely derail a conversation. By engaging with your idea, you disengage with the speaker. The speaker may answer your question or bring up something more interesting and relevant while you are distracted inside your head.
Let ideas come, and let them go. Think about how irritating it can be when you are telling a story, and someone answers with a seemingly unrelated question. When it is time for you to ask a question, trust that you will either remember what you had to say or that it wasn’t meant to be. Engaging with people is of paramount importance. Getting lost in your thoughts is a great way to lose rapport with someone.
5. If You Don’t Know, Say That You Don’t Know
Honesty is an astounding tool when practiced regularly. Better to be honest and open to learning than to bluff and appear unprofessional and untrustworthy. If someone is taking the time to explain something to you, be sure that you understand the premise to comprehend the message best. Just as you should be aware of how others are receiving your words, you must also take care to grasp ideas and stories that are shared with you wholeheartedly.
Don’t lie about your abilities, knowledge, and skills.
6. Never Equate Your Experiences With Another Person’s
No matter how similar two instances may seem, there is never an opportunity to volunteer your own story as a comparison. Listen with intent, not for the sake of comparison but for the purpose of learning about the person speaking. By comparing your own experiences, you fail to absorb the detail and nuance of the experience being shared with you while you also disrespect the sharer, making them less comfortable to share more.
If, afterward, you are invited to communicate your own experience, do not compare and contrast the two. Take the time to tell your story as it occurred, not as a comparison to another. You will not further rapport or the relationship by promoting yourself with experiential comparisons. All experiences are individual. Build open communication by acknowledging the validity of unique experiences.
7. Try Not To Repeat Yourself
Generally speaking, people hear you the first time you say something. Unless they ask you to repeat yourself, don’t. It is condescending to assume that they did not understand or to demand an answer for a particular question. Respect people’s boundaries and allow people to communicate with you in the way they are most comfortable.
Repetition is monotonous and does not further any arguments. Repeatedly approaching the same point from different angles is a great way to turn off a prospect and destroy any rapport built. If it is indeed a matter of misunderstanding, then work on clarifying communication, but be wary.
8. Stay Out Of The Weeds
Dates, numbers, temperature, names of ancillary characters, the exact shade of blue paint; most of the time, people don’t care about the details. Conversations have a flow to them. A rhythm of back and forth between the involved parties. Stopping to conjure the exact date of the meeting that led to a huge breakthrough is going to have a significant impact on building rapport, a negative one. The flow of the story that you are telling is far more meaningful than the date itself. People are easily distracted. Keeping their attention and engaging their mind is the goal. Breaking flow loses the audience’s attention.
If you forget a specific detail, don’t sweat it and move on. If the date is of particular importance to your audience, they will ask for it. If it is imperative for your story, be prepared with a written reminder.
9. Listen
Listening might be the most valuable skill in the world. It is undoubtedly the most important for our purposes. Listen for the sake of understanding and nothing more. Immerse yourself in the person who is sharing with you. Engage fully in creating rapport by clearing your mind of any distractions and forcing yourself to listen.
The human brain is capable of following about 500 words per minute, while we can only speak at around 275 words per minute. So, roughly half the time, you must consciously engross yourself in the story. No matter how boring or slow the contact might be, hang on every word as if it is the secret to eternal happiness.
Keeping the human brain on topic and away from day-dreaming takes mental effort. This effort can be practiced and strengthened by practicing mindfulness.
No one ever listened their way out of a job.
10. Be Brief
III. Target Information
You do not want to dictate every conversation too rigidly, or you will stifle genuine rapport and fail to build meaningful relationships. You do not want to be completely free form, or your discussions will lack direction and meaning. There isn’t an exact checklist of what you need to learn from your contacts while you are networking, but I’ll do my best to give you one.
The main goal is to build and create professional rapport. Networking for this purpose is not a practice in making friends; it’s for developing professional contacts. Although the two are not totally dissimilar. Professionalism is not void of emotional connection, but it must keep a reasonably professional focus.

Topic 
stay on target, but some time can be spent bonding over shared interests – in the light of lifestyle 
About them 
Address their roots – 
origin story, 
what took them into the work, 
preferred work conditions, 
thoughts and feelings about the work they do and the place they work, 
things they wish they knew coming into the industry, 
location benefits, 
traits that fuel their success
From them 
contact(s) within the org, 
workplace attitude and flow, 
do’s and don’t’s, 
gatekeeper – tendencies and general character (how to get your foot in the door), 
possible industry contacts (other orgs doing good similar work), 
characteristics of success
in a specific company 
in industry
About you 
Share your story 
Work and personal story, 
Honest about ambitions without asking for a job, 
Exist within your character – don’t be something you are not
General 
Always offer help before leaving 
Keep a keen ear for some way you can help them during the conversation 
Offer your network 
A small amount of your time (define this while hashing out details) 
If nothing arises, make a general offer, 
“Is there any way I can help you?”
“You have been a tremendous resource, thank you. Is there some way I can return the favor?”
Set a time limit and stick to it 
Not all information is made equal. You do not know what question or topic will yield the knowledge you seek, so follow the guidelines for conversation. The best conversations may veer off course only to lead to a fruitful relationship. Go with the flow. 
Shadowing
You are searching for opportunities to get in the door by either meeting more people, shadowing them a day at work, visiting for a casual gathering; anything that leads towards a productive relationship. 
IV. The Process of Networking
Networking is something you need to do habitually for the rest of this program. From this point onwards, build your network each and every day.
There are 5 steps to networking for jobs.
1. Decide what type of company you want to work for.
2. Build a list of companies who could be a good fit.
3. Research all of the companies on your list.
4. Connect with recruiters and HR professionals in those companies.
5. Reach out to and build relationships with the people who work or have worked in those companies.
Decide what type of company you want to work for
The type of company you want to work for is determined by your compass, the direction your inner light pulls you, and the effect you want to have on the world. This is markedly different from the actual job you are doing. The type of company is who you will be doing your job for. The type of company concerns the goals your work helps to achieve. You can be a graphic designer for a political campaign, or for a vacuum salesman. You can teach in a public school, tutor struggling students, implement corporate training, fight for better education standards in an NGO, and even work in the education sector of some government body. Your chosen career can fit a wide array of fields.
If you have not already made this decision, take the time now to review your work values and your life values. Consider your priorities; some fields pay better than others for the same work. For instance, a geologist can choose to do research for a university or search for precious resources with a private company. Only you can make this decision, but I encourage you to speak with those who are close to you for ideas.
What field of work gives you the best chance of feeling productive and living a life full of value?
List 3-4 ideas here.




Which field of work is most appealing to you and best fits your needs and preferences?




 
Build a list of companies who could be a good fit
A point to remember is that you are not necessarily looking for companies who are actively hiring. It might seem counter-intuitive but will work to your advantage. As I have mentioned, many companies post jobs online to gather information, while others have already made their decision but are required for one reason or another to “go through the motions.”
You want to build a list of companies that are in line with your identity story, fit into your value system, and (preferably) hire people with your skillset. If you do not think they hire people like you, keep an open mind. That criterion certainly makes life more comfortable, but it is not a deal-breaker. More on that later.
For our purposes, there are four types of companies: massive, large, medium, and small companies.
Massive companies have 2500+ employees. These companies tend to have high competition for their openings, a wide variety of locations, an established practice for hiring and come with an array of established benefits.
Large companies have 500-2500 employees. Large companies are more similar to massive companies than they are different. Large and massive companies can be great, or they can be nightmare scenarios. With so many people, many of these companies treat their human capital as numbers rather than as people. While relationships are important, bureaucracy can be king in these organizations.
Medium companies have 150-500 employees. They could be relatively new, up and coming, or recently expanding. They may be established in their niche and comfortable where they are. These tend to be good companies to work for, and are more personal than larger companies while retaining benefits and relative job security. It is unlikely that they are going to fail in the near future, but that doesn’t equate to job security.
Small companies have less than 150 people. These can be the hardest jobs to find but also have the chance to be the most rewarding. If you find a young company on the way up, it could be the opportunity of a lifetime. If you find a stable company around this size, there is a good chance that the company takes care of its people. In times and sectors of economic growth, small companies are invaluable.
(150 is a magic number. One hundred fifty people is roughly the limit for many tribes across the world. It is also about the limit for the number of people you can have any level of relationship within one area of your life. The materials company Gortex keeps its factories at 150 people. When people start parking on the grass, they split and build another factory. Psychologically, this stems from the number 12. You form close relationships with about 12 people, and then have the mental capacity for about 12 acquaintances for each of those first 12 people. Without getting too scientific, twelve twelves give us 144, or about 150. I trust the self-governing tribes as much as I trust a company that returns significant profits year after year, and they both have found 150 to be the magic number. Keep an eye out for companies around this size.)
No two companies are exactly alike, and every person has their preferences, which is why you are going to research each company you target thoroughly.
For this step, find 5 small companies for every 3 medium companies and every 2 large/massive companies. You will go through this process a few times. Start with 10, do your research, continue the process, and repeat. That way, you don’t get stuck brainstorming 50 companies one day then get overwhelmed trying to follow through with the rest of the process for all of them at the same time.

Where do you look to find all these companies? Great question.

People You Know
The most immediate resource you have is also the oldest one: the people you know. Start with your close friends and family, and ask them if they know of any companies in the field you are interested in.
From there, move on to your acquaintances, or weak ties. The idea of weak ties comes from Johns Hopkins sociologist Mark Granovetter’s in his paper called, “The Strength of Weak Ties.” The idea here is that people who know who you are, but you don’t spend a ton of time with, likely have access to information and contacts which you do not.
Weak ties can be school associates, co-workers from the past, neighbors, and your children’s friend’s parents.

Google
Google companies that share your values. You are bound to find one or two, and maybe more.

LinkedIn
LinkedIn is an incredible resource, particularly for this step of the process. You should have a LinkedIn Profile completed with all of your information up to date.
At this time, you should look to connect with as many people that you know as possible. Keep these connections professional. If you attended a college or university, connect with people you know or knew from that time of your life. While those individuals may not have been professionals when you knew them, there is a good chance that they are now. Connections are useful. Start sending requests and LinkedIn will suggest more for you. Request, request, request.
While having a network on LinkedIn makes it more efficient, it is not necessary to have before moving on. Send your requests, and move on to the next step.
Do advanced searches. Enter the job title or field you are seeking in the search bar and search. You should first use the “connections” filter to find people you know who do that work. First connections are people you are connected with. Make a note of any of these people you are comfortable reaching out to. Second connections are people whom your connections are connected with. Having a mutual connection increases your chances for positive interactions and gives you some credibility.
Do a basic search on LinkedIn. On the results page, along the top of the results, find and select the “all filters” button. This will take you to the advanced search tool. Use the advanced search to filter for specific job titles, location, industry, education, language, and more.
Use the advanced search to find people doing work you are interested in and write down the companies that these people work for.
Write down the companies you find in the second tab of the “Job Prospects” spreadsheet (Potential Employers). Fill out the “field,” “company,” “company size,” and “company location” columns at this time.



The second tool of importance on LinkedIn are the Company Pages. These are awesome, and you will use them later to find and identify individuals who work at the companies you are interested in. For now, plug a company you have found into the search bar and make your way to their company page.
While there is a plethora of useful information on these pages, today you are only interested in finding similar companies that interest you. Along the bottom right in the web browser, the bottom of the page in the mobile app, is a list of similar companies. Start with these companies, recording each in your spreadsheet as you go along. Record the number of employees, the field, the location, and the LinkedIn website in the appropriate columns. Repeat this process, finding more and more companies in the same or similar fields.
Researching the companies on your list
Following each of these steps, in turn, will likely yield more companies than are worth researching from the get-go. As you gather your initial list of companies, keep an eye out for places of work that stand out to you. Places that could be of great interest, companies that you believe most closely match your values and your priorities (location, etc.). Start with the companies that stand out from the crowd.
Researching the companies on your list allows you to learn more about the places you might end up working. You are looking to establish your preferences among the field, gain understanding and insight, and get an idea of where you might be a good fit. The process of finding a good job is similar to dating. It needs to work for both parties. You want to be sure that you will enjoy, or at the very least tolerate, the place where you will be spending most of your time. Ideally, you want the company to express and support your values in some practical manner. Doing work that keeps your work values and your life values in line will be the most rewarding work you can find.
Beyond the immediate fit, this research will also help you in the interview process, and later in your job. You are not only studying your future place of work, but you are also studying the competition. You want to get an idea of what the entire market is doing, which will bolster your ability to negotiate down the road. The research is also the first step of building a professional network within your field, which will prove to be invaluable down the road. You might find, or be offered, a better opportunity in the future. You might call upon a contact to help achieve a future goal. Either way, professional networking starts by researching the companies.
For your immediate needs, you want to know the service they provide, their origin story, their mission statement, and the story they tell (if it is different from the mission statement). You will record all of this information and more in the second tab of the “Job Prospects” spreadsheet, on the second tab labeled “Potential Employers.”
Doing the research can be time-consuming, so this is where I suggest that you stick to the ratio I suggested before: 5 small, 3 medium, and 2 large companies per round of research.
To find the information you are seeking, look for their LinkedIn page, website, Glassdoor reviews, and perform a general Google search. You are looking to fill out every column of the spreadsheet. Read or scan the entire website, including the about section. You want to know what they are working on and get a feel for what type of company they are. You might find negatives on the website or their profile, but you will almost certainly find them on Glassdoor or with some digging on google. Companies go to great lengths to project a positive image, but that does not mean they can keep bad reviews off the internet. While reading reviews on any page, keep in mind that companies do engage in the practice of boosting their own reviews and bombing their competitors.
Remember, while the spreadsheet that I have provided you with is a guideline, you are researching your future. Do your due diligence, and find out as much as you feel is necessary. You will be using this information to make decisions about what companies you would like to try to work for, and further where you will network. Then, when it comes time to sit down with real live people, you will use this information to shape how you present yourself.
The edge that I want you to gain from your research is understanding how your story and the company stories work together. The most robust support you can have in your quest to be offered quality jobs is the aligning of both stories. If everything you have done makes you the perfect fit for what they are looking for, you will get an offer. The stronger your argument, the more power you will have when it comes to negotiations.
The best stories are founded in truth. To effectively tell honest stories, you must do thorough research. Get to know everything you can about your prospective places of work, come to understand their story and the services they offer. Once you have a good understanding of the companies, you can start to clarify how your story and theirs are parallel and make the case that they should be brought together.
Connecting with recruiters and HR professionals
For this and the last step of networking, you will be using the third tab of your spreadsheet, labeled “Networking.”
Recruiters and HR professionals are connectors. They know many people and likely got into their line of work because they enjoy working with and connecting people. While there are some recruiters out there who are less than ideal, do not be discouraged by some adverse interactions. If you have had some bad interactions with people in this field, consider that those negative experiences may have been fueled by tight deadlines, bosses and hiring managers who do not know what they want (or worse, they don’t know what they are doing), or any of the everyday stresses in life. While adverse interactions can leave you with a bad taste in your mouth, I want you to look past all negative interactions. Take note of them and move past them. You will not gain anything useful from wallowing on negativity.
So, why do I want you to connect with recruiters and HR professionals? They are social, they connect with everyone at their place of work, they are often the bridge between candidates and hiring managers, and they often move from job to job. Think of these people like the hub of a wheel. By connecting with one person, you have gained secondary connections with a vast range of people. Having evidence of this on LinkedIn helps to establish trust between you and your networking targets.
Rather than employing the “spray and pray” policy, just hoping you find the right people, by targeting recruiters and HR professionals you are connecting with the glue that holds people together first.
So how do you find these wonderfully connected people? With a LinkedIn advanced search for people with “recruiter” in their job title.
Further, visit the profiles of the companies on your list, and search through their employees with the keywords: recruiter, talent, human resources, and HR.
Once you find these amazing people, send them a connection request. In that request, tell them why you want to connect. For example:
Dear [recruiter’s name],
I am very interested in joining [company name] on their journey to [company mission]. I am a [position title] looking for the next step in my mission to [6-10 word summary of life mission]. Are you the recruiter who handles these kinds of positions? If not, will you direct me to the recruiter who does? Could we set up a time to talk about your organization? In the meantime, please accept this invitation to connect.
[Your name]
Don’t say more. Once you have sent the invitation, wait for them to accept, or even reach out to you.
If they do not accept, that is okay. You have left an excellent first impression by being transparent, forward, and goal-oriented.
If they do accept, but you do not hear from them, that is okay too. You will now show up as an immediate connection to them, and a secondary connection to their entire network. You have also left a good first impression.
In the case that you do hear back from them, follow up with genuine curiosity and network with them with the same strategies and enthusiasm that you would with any other new professional contact. Primarily, you are hoping for advice, insights, and recommendations. Moreover, ask how you can help them. You want to flatter people professionally, and you want to offer your help. Networking is all about building relationships. These are the gatekeepers; being on their good side is priceless.
If you don’t get the job that you are looking for, but you have built a strong relationship with the gatekeeper, they may refer you for another position. There is no wrong time to make a good impression. Keep your head up and don’t ever be discouraged.
Be sure to keep track of these individuals as time goes on. No one is guaranteed a job forever, and you might find that these positive relationships take years to bear fruit. You can never have too many opportunities. Do everything you can to be genuine and helpful. You never know how it may help you down the road.
Building relationships with people like you
The most critical aspect of networking is building relationships. Relationships are the essence of the economy. Interviews are like speed dating, an unnatural encounter with limited information with lasting implications. My goal is to equip you with tools that give you the best possible chance at having and creating positive encounters. The fewer variables that are left to chance, the better. Up to 85% of new hires come from employee references. By building relationships with employees in your target industry, in your target companies, you are creating the best possible odds.
What’s more, the people you are hoping to join are likely to be similar to you. While no two people are identical, they should have some set similar interests, similar skill sets, a similar work ethic, and similar values. Building these relationships provides you with the references you need to improve your chances of finding the best possible job, and it gives you an opportunity to get insider information about the work itself, and the place of work. Asking thoughtful, forward-thinking questions will provide you with the information you need to make informed decisions.
You will find people like you in the same way that you found the gatekeepers of your target companies, on the company LinkedIn profile, using the advanced search tool. By this time, you should have made a connection with a gatekeeper giving you a mutual connection with target employees. As you go through your advanced search, reach out to people in order of connection. The closer your connection, the more likely they are to respond. For second degree connections in your target job market, consider reaching out to your mutual connection and asking for an introduction. You are looking to build real relationships. The more genuine you are, the better your standing will be.
Remember to be persistent. Reach out a few times, but keep it to two or three attempts. Instead, direct your persistence towards other options and possibilities. Do not set your heart upon any particular connection. Let the connections come that will. Focus on your successes and learn from your failures. I am reluctant to give you any sort of a script because it needs to be genuine.  It is not a sales meeting, do not adopt slimy tactics. While I am more than happy to provide any advice you may seek when we speak, the best connections you can make will be genuine, and genuine connections are made between the involved parties.
Never directly ask these people for jobs. Approach them with curiosity. You are looking for advice and insight. Networking is like a finger trap. With the finger trap, the harder you pull, the tighter it holds you; you must first push inwards to loosen the grip of the trap before you can remove your fingers. With networking, being bullish rarely works. You do not want to approach people asking for or demanding opportunities. Instead, contact them looking to build a relationship. Forward-thinking professionals know the value of network building and will be happy to extend their network. Professional friendship opens doors for all parties involved.
The key is to ask for advice. By asking for advice, you are insinuating that they have knowledge that you covet, you are complimenting them. Most people enjoy talking about themselves. You want to set up a meeting, or a conversation, to ask them about their journey, and any advice they have for you. Ask to meet for coffee, lunch, or to speak on the phone at a time that is convenient for them. You never want to ask for more than 20 minutes of their time. A good tip is to be exact, ask for 19 minutes. If you do that, be serious about your deadline. Set an alarm (on vibrate) for 17 minutes and wrap up the conversation when the time comes. If you set an exact time, do everything you can to stick to your precise time. Be honest, be thorough, stick to your word, and leave the best impression you possibly can.
No matter how the person reacts, be polite. You might run into some folks that are less than pleased with your invitation. Do not be bothered by anything they say and never be less than positive and polite. On the flip side, do not let someone take advantage of you. You are offering help and giving praise, but do not work for free. There is give and take in beneficial relationships, but always be sure that you are not the only one giving. If you find that someone is asking too much of you, remain polite, but be firm. You are valuable, while one person may look to abuse your kindness, others will be happy to build a beneficial relationship. Sometimes, a firm but polite “no, thank you” is the best option available. While you don’t want a reputation for being rude, being respected is worth more than being liked.
You are not asking for a job. The purpose of networking is to find out the positives and negatives about the work they do and their place of work. You want to know if this is work you are going to be comfortable and successful performing and if you would be a good fit in their company. Ask about the positives and negatives of their place of work. Finally, you want to ask them to whom you should speak next. Get a referral. Ideally, each contact leads you to another contact. Building your network inside of a company and inside of an industry gives you industry strength and improves your odds of receiving quality job offers. Don’t forget to ask for recommendations.
Past employees are wonderful sources of information. While a current employee has an incentive to speak positively about their place of work, someone who has moved on does not. Of course, some people have bad experiences and harbor negative feelings, but generally speaking past employees will be the most honest about the workplace. A positive review from someone without much incentive to give one is precious. A reasonably negative review is a serious red flag and deserves your attention.
Carefully cultivated professional relationships will bear fruit for years to come. This particular step of the process is not only the best way for you to get your foot in the door, but it is also the best way to set yourself up for success for the future. Job security is more and more difficult to find. The economy is in constant flux, and I would be failing you if you were only ready for your next job. My goal is to prepare you for every job you will need for the rest of your life.
Most jobs, the most successful jobs, come from professional networks and referrals. The best relationships are genuine. The people you reach out to and connect with do not need to become your best friends, but they could be the most valuable relationships you form. You never know where people’s journeys will take them. By connecting with people in your industry and leaving them with positive emotional memories about you, you are giving yourself the best odds to land your dream job now, while opening up the best possible paths into your future.

V. Preparation
5-10 days prior - 
research the company and the person, 
come prepared with a few genuine questions that build on what is commonly known about the company, 
ask what brought the individual to the company, 
establish how your story and the company story intersect
Immediately before -
take written questions, 
pen and paper, 
solid copy resume, 
dress for the job, 
review research & story intersection, 
breathe. 
After - 
send thank you notes to secretary and individual with a summary of skills and interview or the bond created

**Negotiation**
Before officially accepting any job, negotiate your salary and benefits. Negotiation is the most undervalued portion of most job transitions. There is no downside to negotiating your salary. A lack of negotiation leads to all sorts of discrepancies in pay, do yourself a favor and be prepared for the process well before you are offered a position.
The basic premise of negotiation is that you have a minimum you are willing to accept, and your future employer has a maximum they are ready to give if your minimum is lower than the employer’s maximum, then the two of you should be able to work out a satisfactory arrangement. If there is no common ground, then there is no deal. Do not take a job that does not meet your needs.
The common ground, between your minimum and their maximum, is commonly referred to as the pie. Both parties want as much of the pie for themselves as possible. The goal for all parties in negotiation is to identify the pie and take as much of it as possible for themselves.
Preparation
There are three central figures you need to identify before engaging in any salary negotiation: your needs, the value potential employers place on your skillset, and how much you value benefit packages.
Every worker has a certain amount that they need, often referred to as BATNA (the best alternative to a negotiated agreement). Your BATNA is the point at which you genuinely do not care if you get the deal done or not. The salary package at your BATNA does not excite you. It is your absolute minimum. You should have identified your needs back in week 1. Review them. Never accept less than what you are worth and what you need.
To discern how valuable you are to potential employers, you must do some market research. Websites like glassdoor.com can help you to identify the range and average salary for people holding similar positions in particular locations. Do your due diligence and research your market. Carefully consider your skillset and experience and estimate the absolute maximum that a company might pay you.
Finally, it would be best if you had a thorough understanding of how valuable benefits packages are to you. For example, if you are a parent to 7, and your partner does not work, full family health insurance coverage is much more valuable than if you are single with no kids. Consider your current situation, how long you plan to stay with the company, and the trajectory of your life when weighing the value of benefits. Dental, health insurance, incentives, commission, bonuses, paid time off, sick leave, unpaid time off, maternity leave, rollover benefits, stock options, potential career paths, internal training, professional development, continued education, job security, salary vs. hourly, overtime, tax incentives, tech budget, and any industry-specific benefits need to be considered thoroughly. Benefit packages can be complicated and often look very different from company to company. Understand your needs, determine what you need vs. what you do not need, and decide how much each of these is worth to you. Everyone has different values and situations, be prepared to ask for what you need.
Practice
For some, negotiations are natural and fun. For others, they are entirely foreign and nerve-racking. For all, training will improve your chances of walking away with more of the pie. Negotiate meals with family, activities with friends, and prices at bazaars and flea markets.
The more you practice, the more natural the process will become.
Execution
Never start a negotiation at your BATNA, begin with the most that you can defend. Let’s say that the range of incomes for your desired position is $85,000 - $110,000 per year according to your market research. Considering your skillset and experience, you can build an argument for $105,000, and your BATNA is $90,000. Your very first ask should be $105,000 or higher.
Do not egregiously overshoot the max that you are worth. You do not want to insult your potential employer. So, in our example, don’t start at $210,000, that would be ridiculous. You should, however, push the limit. You will only ever get what you negotiate for. If you think you are worth 105, the only way you will get your goal is to ask for it. Once you put out a number, you will have a tough time asking for more. Start high and be ready to negotiate backward or to trade dollars for benefits. Value yourself.
Never accept less than your BATNA. You need to understand how much benefits are worth to you before a company pushes the bottom of your range and offers benefits in compensation. If you cannot find an offer that meets your pre-established needs, walk away. Value yourself. Trust the research that you have done and trust that you are worth what you know you are worth.
It is entirely likely that you and the person across the table will go back and forth a few times. You do not want to be rude during this process, but you do want to show confidence and determination. Do not make promises you cannot keep, and do not let anyone undervalue your worth.
In the best-case scenarios, both you and the other involved parties should be happy with the agreement. You want to be valued, and you want your employer to get a good return with the value you bring to the table. If you are the only benefactor from the arrangement, and your company loses money on you, then your position will be at risk. That is not a likely situation, but be aware of how much you can deliver. On the flip side, if you are under-valued and underpaid, you will not have the proper incentive to deliver the most to your company.
You only get what you negotiate. Understand how much value you bring to the table. Value yourself.
Post-Negotiation
While some negotiations can get heated, the ultimate goal is to reach an agreement. Once you have achieved your goals, be happy about it. Appreciate a company that places value in you and reciprocate that value. Deliver what you promised, do not make a fool of the person/people who agree to pay you what you bargained for. Show your gratitude, but understand that talk is cheap.
Day 4 – Research
At this point there is very little information left for you to learn. It is time to go out in the real world and practice the skills you have learned thus far. 
Careful research is paramount to your success. Use the skills and techniques discussed in day 3 to thoroughly research potential employers, contacts, gatekeepers, and your target industry. 
Start with 5 small, 3 medium, and 2 large companies per round of research. Complete a full round of research before reaching out. 
Decide what type of company you want to work for
Build a list of companies that could be a good fit
Research the companies on your list
Identify the gatekeepers in your field, and in target organizations
Gather all relevant contact information
Identify individuals doing the work that you want to be doing
Gather all relevant contact information

Day 5 – Action
It is time to take action and start building your professional network. Use the skills and techniques discussed in day 3 to contact potential employers, contacts, gatekeepers, and your target industry. 
Begin growing your LinkedIn network using the templates and methods discussed. 
Leverage Facebook groups, your existing network, and the internet at large to contact the people you have researched. 
Set up meetings for advice and fostering professional relationships. 
Embrace the 5 mindsets and learn as much as you can about your industry and the companies within it. 
Earn at least one reference from each and every positive contact. 
Seize any opportunity to engage in professional development (shadowing, visit the workplace, meet co-workers).
Any given conversation could lead to a job offer, treat every interaction accordingly. 
Review day 3 if you have any doubts or questions.



