






Personality Type Summaries
Paul D. Tieger, Barbara Barron, & Kelly Tieger
Do What You Are
5th Edition
Chapter 3 “Mirror, Mirror: Verifying Your Personality Type”

Table of Contents
ENFJ	2
INFJ	3
ENFP	4
INFP	5
ENTJ	6
INTJ	8
ENTP	9
INTP	10
ESTJ	11
ISTJ	12
ESFJ	13
ISFJ	14
ESTP	15
ISTP	16
ESFP	17
ISFP	18

ENFJ
Extraverted, Intuitive, Feeling, Judging
Approximately 3–5 percent of the American population
ENFJs are people-lovers. They place the highest importance on people and relationships and are naturally concerned about others. They take a warm approach to life and feel personally connected to all things.
Because they are idealistic and live by their values, ENFJs are very loyal to the people, causes, or institutions they respect and admire. They are energetic and enthusiastic, as well as responsible, conscientious, and persevering.
ENFJs have a natural tendency to be self-critical. However, because they feel responsible for the feelings of others, ENFJs are seldom critical in public. They are acutely aware of what is (and isn’t) appropriate behavior, and are gracious, charming, personable, and socially adept. Even-tempered and tolerant, ENFJs are diplomatic and are good at promoting harmony around them. They are natural leaders, popular and charismatic. They tend to be good communicators, and usually use their expressive gift verbally.
ENFJs make decisions based upon how they feel about a situation, rather than how the situation actually stands. They are interested in possibilities beyond what is already obvious, and in the ways these possibilities might affect others.
Being naturally orderly, ENFJs prefer an organized world and expect others to be the same way. They like to have matters settled, even if someone else is making the decisions.
ENFJs radiate sympathy and understanding and are nurturing and supportive of others. They read people well and are responsible and caring. Since they are idealists, they generally look for the good in others.
Possible Blind Spots
ENFJs are so empathetic and caring that they can become overly involved with the problems or feelings of others. Sometimes they choose causes that aren’t worthy of all the time and energy they pour into them. When things don’t work out well, they can become overwhelmed, disappointed, or disillusioned. This can lead them to withdraw, feeling they weren’t appreciated. ENFJs need to learn to accept their own limitations as well as those of the people they care about. They also need to learn how to “pick their battles” and how to maintain realistic expectations.
Because of their strong desire for harmony, ENFJs can overlook their own needs and ignore real problems. Because they avoid conflict, they sometimes maintain relationships that are less than honest and equal. ENFJs are so concerned about the feelings of others that they can be blind to important facts when the situation involves criticism or hurt feelings. It’s important that ENFJs learn how to accept and deal with conflict as a necessary part of relationships.
Because they are enthusiastic and in a hurry to get on with their next challenge, ENFJs sometimes make incorrect assumptions or make decisions too quickly, without gathering all the important facts. They need to slow down and pay closer attention to the details of their projects. By waiting until enough information is known, they can avoid making mistakes.
ENFJs focus on emotions to the point that they can fail to see the logical consequences of their actions. Trying to focus on the facts, not just the people, involved in their decisions can be helpful.
ENFJs respond well to praise, but are easily hurt by criticism, which can make them appear touchy. They take even the most innocent or well-intentioned criticism personally, and they often respond by becoming flustered, hurt, or angry. Their responses can be illogical to the point that they “appear downright irrational to others. ENFJs do well to stop, take a step back, and try to see a situation objectively before reacting. Trying to be less sensitive will enable an ENFJ to hear the important and helpful information that is contained in constructive criticism.
ENFJs are so idealistic that they tend to see things the way they wish they were. They are vulnerable to idealizing relationships, and they tend to overlook facts that contradict what they believe. ENFJs who don’t learn to face facts they find disagreeable end up ignoring their problems instead of finding solutions for them. In general, ENFJs need to try to keep their eyes open as well as their hearts.

INFJ
Introverted, Intuitive, Feeling, Judging
Approximately 2–3 percent of the American population
INFJs inhabit a world of ideas. They are independent, original thinkers with strong feelings, firm principles, and personal integrity.
INFJs trust their own ideas and decisions even in the face of skepticism. They are motivated by an inner vision that they value above all else, including prevailing opinion or established authority. INFJs often see deeper meanings and have intuitive insights into situations. Their inspirations are important and valid to them even if others don’t share their enthusiasm.
INFJs are loyal, committed, and idealistic. They are quietly forceful in having their ideas accepted and applied. They value integrity and can be determined to the point of being stubborn. Because of the strength of their conviction and their clear vision of what is best for the common good, INFJs can be great leaders. They are often honored or respected for their contributions.
Because they value harmony and agreement, INFJs like to persuade others of the validity of their viewpoint. They win the cooperation of others by using approval and praise, rather than argument or intimidation. INFJs will go to great lengths to promote fellowship and avoid conflict.
Generally thoughtful decision makers, INFJs find problems stimulating and usually reflect carefully before they act. They prefer to focus in great depth on one thing at a time, which can result in periods of single-mindedness.
Empathetic and compassionate, INFJs have a strong desire to contribute to the welfare of others. They are aware of other people’s emotions and interests, and often deal well with complicated people. INFJs themselves tend to have deep, complex personalities and can be both sensitive and intense. They can be reserved and hard to get to know, but are willing to share their inner selves with people they trust. They tend to have a small circle of deep, longstanding friendships, and can generate plenty of personal warmth and enthusiasm in the right circumstances.
Possible Blind Spots
Since they tend to be so absorbed with “the idea,” INFJs can sometimes be impractical and are capable of neglecting routine details that need attention. Becoming more aware of what is around them and relying more on proven information helps INFJs anchor their creative ideas in the real world.
INFJs can be so committed to their own principles that they develop tunnel vision. They can be stubborn about change, and may resist changing a decision once it has been made. Sometimes they overlook important facts that don’t support their position, or resist ideas that conflict with their values. They may not hear the objections of others because, to them, their position seems unquestionable. INFJs need to attempt to look at themselves and at their work more objectively, as others might.
Because they are so protective of their own vision, INFJs tend to overregulate. They are often perfectionists, and they can be hypersensitive to criticism. Although they are strong-willed, they also have difficulty dealing with conflicts in relationships and can become disappointed or disillusioned if conflicts develop. The more objective INFJs can be about themselves and their relationships, the less vulnerable they will be to these kinds of hurts.
ENFP
Extraverted, Intuitive, Feeling, Perceiving
Approximately 6–7 percent of the American population
ENFPs are full of enthusiasm and new ideas. Optimistic, spontaneous, creative, and confident, they have original minds and a strong sense of the possible. For an ENFP, life is an exciting drama.
Because they are so interested in possibilities, ENFPs see significance in all things and prefer to keep lots of options open. They are perceptive and keen observers who notice anything out of the ordinary. ENFPs are curious; they prefer to understand rather than judge.
Imaginative, adaptable, and alert, ENFPs value inspiration above all else and are often ingenious inventors. They are sometimes nonconformists, and are good at seeing new ways of doing things. ENFPs open up new avenues for thought or action… and then keep them open!
In carrying out their innovative ideas, ENFPs rely on their impulsive energy. They have lots of initiative and find problems stimulating. They also get an infusion of energy from being around other people, and can successfully combine their talents with the strengths of others.
ENFPs are charming and full of vitality. They treat people with sympathy, gentleness, and warmth and are ready to help anyone with a problem. They can be remarkably insightful and perceptive, and they often care about the development of others. ENFPs avoid conflict and prefer harmony. They put more energy into maintaining personal relationships than into maintaining objects, and they like to keep a wide assortment of relationships alive.
Possible Blind Spots
Since they find it so easy to generate ideas, ENFPs have difficulty focusing on just one thing at a time and can have trouble making decisions. They see so many possibilities that they have difficulty selecting the best activity or interest to pursue. Sometimes they make poor choices or get involved with too many things at once. Carefully choosing where they will focus their energy helps ENFPs avoid wasting their time and squandering their considerable talents.
To an ENFP, the fun part of a project is the initial problem solving and creation of something new. They like to exercise their inspiration on the important and challenging parts of a problem. After this stage, they often lose interest and lack the self-discipline necessary to complete what they’ve started. They are likely to start many projects but finish few. ENFPs have more to show for their efforts when they follow through with the necessary but tedious parts of a project until it is completed. Often writing important facts or steps down on paper helps them keep from getting sidetracked.
Often ENFPs are not particularly well organized. They can benefit from learning and applying time management and personal organizational skills. They do well when they team up with other more realistic and practical people. This usually suits them fine anyway, since ENFPs don’t like working alone, especially for extended periods of time. They find working with another person, even on a less interesting phase of a project, far preferable to working alone.
ENFPs are not much interested in details. Since they are more excited about using their imagination and creating something original, they may not bother to collect all the information they need in order to carry out a particular activity. Sometimes they just improvise on the spot, instead of planning and preparing ahead. Because they find information gathering tedious, ENFPs run the risk of never getting past the “bright idea” stage or, once started, never finishing. Always restless, they’d rather put off dealing with troublesome details and move on to something else new or unusual. ENFPs are more effective when they consciously attend to the actual world around them and gather more realistic impressions to make their innovations workable.
INFP
Introverted, Intuitive, Feeling, Perceiving
Approximately 3–4 percent of the American population
INFPs value inner harmony above all else. Sensitive, idealistic, and loyal, they have a strong sense of honor concerning their personal values and are often motivated by deep personal belief or by devotion to a cause they feel is worthy.
INFPs are interested in possibilities beyond what is already known and focus most of their energy on their dreams and visions. Open-minded, curious, and insightful, they often have excellent long-range vision. In day-to-day matters they are usually flexible, tolerant, and adaptable, but they are very firm about their inner loyalties and set very high—in fact, nearly impossible—standards for themselves.
INFPs have many ideals and loyalties that keep them occupied. They are deeply committed to whatever they choose to undertake—and they tend to undertake too much but somehow get everything done.
Although they demonstrate cool reserve on the outside, INFPs care deeply inside. They are compassionate, sympathetic, understanding, and very sensitive to the feelings of others. They avoid conflict and are not interested in impressing or dominating others unless their values are at stake. Often INFPs prefer to communicate their feelings in writing, rather than orally. When they are persuading others of the importance of their ideals, INFPs can be most convincing.
INFPs seldom express the intensity of their feelings and often appear reticent and calm. However, once they know you, they are enthusiastic and warm. INFPs are friendly, but tend to avoid superficial socializing. They treasure people who take the time to understand their goals and values.
Possible Blind Spots
Since logic is not a priority for INFPs, they sometimes make errors of fact and can be unaware that they are being illogical. When their dreams become out of touch with reality, others may see them as flighty and mystical. INFPs do well to ask the advice of more practical people to find out if their ideas are workable and useful in the real world.
Because they are so committed to their own ideals, INFPs have a tendency to overlook other points of view and can sometimes be rigid. They are not particularly interested in physical surroundings, and often are so busy that they fail to notice what is happening around them.
INFPs may reflect on an idea much longer than is really necessary to begin a project. Their perfectionistic tendencies can lead them to refine and polish their ideas for so long that they never share them. This is dangerous, since it is important for INFPs to find ways of expressing their ideas. To keep from getting discouraged, they need to work toward becoming more action-oriented.
INFPs are so emotionally entangled in their undertakings that they are very sensitive to criticism. To complicate things further, they tend to demand too much of themselves as they aspire to their own impossibly high standards. This can lead to feelings of inadequacy, even though they in fact are capable of accomplishing a great deal. When INFPs are disappointed, they tend to become negative about everything around them. Trying to develop more objectivity about their projects will help keep INFPs less vulnerable to both criticism and disappointment.
Because INFPs tend to try to please many people at the same time, it can be hard for them to stand up for an unpopular position. They hesitate to criticize others, and they have a hard time saying no. When INFPs don’t express their negative opinions about ideas or plans, others can be misled into thinking they agree with them. INFPs need to develop more assertiveness, and can benefit from learning how to offer honest criticism of others when needed.
ENTJ
Extraverted, Intuitive, Thinking, Judging
Approximately 2–5 percent of the American population
ENTJs are great leaders and decision makers. They easily see possibilities in all things and are happy to direct others toward making their vision become a reality. They are ingenious thinkers and great long-range planners.
Because ENTJs are so logical and analytical, they are usually good at anything that requires reasoning and intelligence. Driven to achieve competence in all they do, they can naturally spot the flaws that may exist in a situation and see immediately how to improve them. They strive to perfect systems rather than simply accept them as they are. ENTJs enjoy working with complex problem solving and are undaunted in their pursuit of mastery of anything they find intriguing. ENTJs value truth above all else and are convinced only by logical reasoning.
Eager to continually add to their base of knowledge, ENTJs are systematic about planning and researching new things. They enjoy working with complex theoretical problems and work toward the pursuit of mastery of anything they find intriguing. They are much more interested in the future consequences of actions than the present condition of things.
Natural leaders with a hearty and frank style, ENTJs tend to take charge of any situation they find themselves in. They are good organizers of people because they have the ability to see ahead and then communicate their vision to others. They tend to live by a rather strict set of rules and expect others to do so as well. Therefore, they tend to be challenging and push others as hard as they push themselves.
Possible Blind Spots
Owing to their desire to move on to the next challenge or toward their larger goal, ENTJs sometimes make decisions too hastily. Slowing down occasionally will give the chance to gather all relevant data, and consider both the practical and personal ramifications of their actions. Their action orientation propels them to act on their decisions as soon as they are made rather than stopping to double check their facts and the realities of the situation.
Because ENTJs take a logical approach to life, they can be tough, blunt, impatient, and insensitive to the needs and feelings of others when they don’t see the logic of those feelings. ENTJs can be argumentative and difficult to approach and don’t often welcome the commonsense advice of others. Rather than automatically being critical, they need to listen to the input of those around them and express their appreciation for their contributions. ENTJs need to make a conscious effort—in fact to make it a rule—to stop and listen to others before charging ahead with their own ideas, and avoid acting domineering and dictatorial.
ENTJs’ impersonal approach to life leaves little time, tolerance, or compassion for emotions, even their own. When they allow their feelings to go ignored or unexpressed, they can find themselves overreacting emotionally. They are particularly prone to this if they perceive someone to be questioning their competence, especially someone they respect. They can have explosive reactions to seemingly insignificant situations, and these outbursts can be hurtful to those close to them. ENTJs are more effective and happy when they give themselves time to consider and understand how they really feel. Giving their emotions a constructive outlet, rather than allowing them to take over their personalities, will actually allow them to stay more fully in control, a position they enjoy and strive for. Surprisingly, ENTJs may actually be less experienced and competent than their confident style indicates. They will increase their personal power and rate of success by allowing themselves to take some reasonable and valuable assistance from others.
INTJ
Introverted, Intuitive, Thinking, Judging
Approximately 2–4 percent of the American population
INTJs are perfectionists. Their strong need for autonomy and personal competence, as well as their unshakable faith in their own original ideas, drives them to achieve their objectives.
Logical, critical, and ingenious, INTJs can see the consequences of the application of new ideas and live to see systems translated into real substance. They are demanding with themselves and others, and tend to drive others almost as hard as themselves. They are not particularly bothered by indifference or criticism. As the most independent of all types, INTJs prefer to do things their own way. They are usually skeptical, decisive, and determined in the face of opposition. They are not impressed with authority per se, but can conform to rules only if they see them as useful to their greater purpose.
With original minds, great insight, and vision, INTJs are natural brainstormers. They are naturally theoretical and work well with complex and global concepts. They are good strategic thinkers and can usually see with clarity the benefits and flaws of any situation. In subjects that interest them, they are fine organizers with insight and vision. If the idea or project is of their own making, they can invest incredible concentration, focus, energy, and drive. Their many accomplishments are achieved through determination and perseverance toward reaching or exceeding their high standards.
Possible Blind Spots
Being visionaries with sometimes unrealistically high standards, INTJs may expect too much from themselves and others. In fact, they tend not to care how they measure up to others’ standards; it is their own that are important. They may lack an understanding of how their behavior affects others and can be critical and blunt in giving recommendations for improvement. They don’t often encourage others to challenge their views or express any personal feelings. Because INTJs have a rather impersonal style, they may erroneously assume others wish to be treated in the same manner. They need to learn to understand the seemingly “illogical” feelings of others, and accept that they are rational and valid. This will help keep them from alienating and offending those around them.
Because INTJs place so much value on their own visions and ideas for the future, they are vulnerable to missing some important realities and facts of the present moment. They may also fail to recognize practical weaknesses in their ideas that may make their execution more difficult. Gathering all the relevant and factual data will help ensure that their ideas are workable. INTJs need to simplify their often theoretical and complicated ideas so they can communicate them to others.
Because INTJs often choose to be alone and are single-minded in their efforts, they can neglect to invite others to participate or assist in their activities. Soliciting the input and suggestions of others can help them recognize an impractical idea earlier in the process, or help them make the necessary changes and improvements before investing huge amounts of time.
Increased effectiveness for INTJs lies in making an effort to yield on less important points to win the more important ones. This will also decrease the likelihood of the INTJ becoming too stubborn and controlling. When they make an effort to adopt a more accepting approach to life and their dealings with others, INTJs will achieve more balance and competence, and will succeed at having more of their innovations accepted by the world.
ENTP
Extraverted, Intuitive, Thinking, Perceiving
Approximately 2–5 percent of the American population
ENTPs love excitement and challenge. Enthusiastic and ingenious, they are talkative, clever, and good at many things and “constantly strive to increase their competence and personal power.
ENTPs are born enterprising. They are fascinated with new ideas and are alert to all possibilities. They have strong initiative and operate on creative impulse. ENTPs value their inspiration above all else and strive to turn their original ideas into reality. They are inquisitive, versatile, adaptable, and resourceful in solving challenging and theoretical problems.
Alert and outspoken, ENTPs can easily see the flaw in any position and often enjoy arguing for fun on either side of an issue. They have excellent analytical abilities and are great strategic thinkers. They can almost always find a logical reason for the things that they want.
Most ENTPs like to test the limits around them and consider that most rules and regulations are meant to be bent, if not broken. They are sometimes unconventional in their approach and enjoy helping others to push past what is accepted and expected. They like to live freely and look for fun and variety in everyday situations.
ENTPs deal imaginatively with social relationships and often have a great number and variety of friends and acquaintances. They can display great humor and optimism. ENTPs can be charming and stimulating company and often inspire others to become involved in their projects through their infectious enthusiasm. They prefer to try to understand and respond to people rather than judge them.
Possible Blind Spots
Because ENTPs value creativity and innovation above all else, they sometimes ignore the standard way of doing something simply because it is not original. Their intense dislike for the routine and predictable can make it difficult for them to notice the necessary details. They sometimes neglect the needed preparation when, in their zeal to take on something fresh, they dive in too quickly. And once major problems are solved, they are often off to the next exciting adventure rather than sticking around to see the original project through. They need to work toward making commitments to fewer projects so they will complete more of the ones they start.
Often, ENTPs talk so quickly, and so much, they don’t allow others to contribute. They are honest and fair but can be blunt and tactless in their ready criticism of others. ENTPs need to consider the feelings of others as valid and important, even if they don’t share them. While they can be charming, funny, and entertaining, they can also be insincere. ENTPs need to resist the urge to simply adapt and perform, and instead share their genuine emotions.
ENTPs’ reluctance to commit to one thing stems from the fear that they may miss other, more appealing opportunities. Their desire to remain open and responsive to new challenges can make them undependable and inconsiderate of the plans and schedules of others. Thinking through how their actions affect others will help them be more dependable.
ENTPs’ natural quickness and ability to anticipate what is coming means they occasionally assume erroneously that they knew what the person was going to say, and may jump in to finish their sentences. Taking the time to pay closer attention to what is actually going on in the real world around them and listening carefully to the input and reactions of others will help them avoid appearing arrogant and rude.
INTP
Introverted, Intuitive, Thinking, Perceiving
Approximately 3–5 percent of the American population
INTPs are conceptual problem solvers. They are intensely intellectual and logical, with flashes of creative brilliance.
Outwardly quiet, reserved, and detached, INTPs are inwardly absorbed in analyzing problems. They are critical, precise, and skeptical. They try to find and use principles to understand their many ideas. They like conversation to be logical and purposeful and may argue to the point of hairsplitting just for fun. INTPs are convinced only by logical reasoning.
INTPs are usually ingenious and original thinkers. They prize intelligence in themselves, have a strong drive for personal competence, and are interested in challenging other people to become more competent as well. INTPs are primarily interested in seeing possibilities beyond what is currently known, accepted, or obvious. They like to develop models for improving the way things are or solving difficult problems. They think in extremely complex ways and are better able to organize concepts and ideas than they are able to organize people. Occasionally, their ideas are so complex they have difficulty communicating and making others understand them.
Highly independent, INTPs enjoy speculative and imaginative activities. They are flexible and open-minded and are more interested in finding creative yet sound solutions to problems than they are in seeing those solutions made into reality.
Possible Blind Spots
Because INTPs rely so heavily on their logical analysis, they can overlook what matters to others. If something is not logical, INTPs run the risk of dismissing it, even if it is important to them. Admitting to themselves what they really care about will help them stay in touch with their true feelings.
INTPs are excellent at detecting the flaws in an idea but are more reticent about expressing their appreciation. They can get bogged down on a minor flaw in one part of a plan and keep the entire project from moving toward completion because they refuse to let one illogical point remain within the whole. When they turn their highly honed critical thinking skills on the people around them, their naked honesty may translate into unintended hurtfulness. They need to be told, and need to learn to ask, what matters emotionally to others.
Because INTPs are fascinated with solving problems, they tend to be impatient with routine details and may lose interest in a project and never complete it if it requires too much follow-through or detail. Turning their energy outward will enable them to gain sufficient practical knowledge to make their ideas workable and acceptable to other people.
INTPs sometimes feel inadequate when they try to live up to their own high standards of perfection. Learning to share those feelings with someone else can help them get a more realistic and objective view of themselves.
ESTJ
Extraverted, Sensing, Thinking, Judging
Approximately 8–12 percent of the American population
ESTJs are great at getting things done. They like to run the show and make things happen. They are responsible, conscientious, and faithful to their commitments. They like structure and can remember and organize many details. They systematically set about achieving their goals on schedule and as efficiently as possible.
ESTJs are driven to make decisions. Often they base their decisions on their own past experience. They are logical, objective, and analytical and have great reasoning power. In fact, they are unlikely to be persuaded by anything but logic.
ESTJs are realistic, practical, and matter-of-fact. They are more interested in “real things” than in intangibles, such as abstract ideas and theories. They tend to not be interested in subjects for which they see no practical application. They know what’s happening around them and are concerned primarily with the here and now.
Because they live by a certain set of rules, ESTJs are consistent and dependable. They tend to be traditional and interested in maintaining established institutions. They are consistent in their relationships, although their emotional and social life is not as important to them as other aspects of “life. They are comfortable judging others, and can be crisp disciplinarians.
ESTJs are outgoing, sociable, direct, and friendly. They are usually easy to get to know, since “what you see is what you get.
Possible Blind Spots
Because ESTJs adopt a strict code of ethics for both themselves and others, they can be seen as dictatorial when they attempt to impose their standards of behavior on others. Attempting to be more flexible and open-minded will prevent an ESTJ from becoming rigid.
Being logical and impersonal analysts, ESTJs don’t naturally consider the impact their decisions have on others. They can be seen as cold and uncaring, and often need to become more aware of their own feelings as well as more respectful of the thoughts and feelings of others.
Since they are naturally critical, ESTJs usually don’t demonstrate their appreciation of the positive attributes or contributions of those around them. They need to try to become more aware of the talents and efforts of others, and then offer compliments and praise.
Sometimes ESTJs are so intent on their own plans that they don’t stop to listen to what others have to say. They don’t naturally ask “what if,” so they often miss possible meanings, implications, connections, and patterns. An easy way to protect against being close-minded is to wait a few seconds before speaking, giving others a chance to offer input.
ESTJs often jump to conclusions without gathering all the necessary information or taking the time to fully understand a situation. They need to learn to consciously delay making decisions until they have considered more information, especially alternatives they may have overlooked.
ESTJs who have been able to relinquish some of the control they seek and who have learned to see that there are gray areas in life (rather than seeing things only in black and white) become more adaptable and successful.
ISTJ
Introverted, Sensing, Thinking, Judging
Approximately 11–14 percent of the American population
ISTJs are the serious, responsible, and sensible stalwarts of society. They are trustworthy and honor their commitments. Their word is their solemn vow.
Practical and realistic, ISTJs are matter-of-fact and thorough. They are painstakingly accurate and methodical, with great powers of concentration. Whatever they are doing they accomplish with orderliness and reliability. They have unshakable, well-thought-out ideas and are difficult to distract or discourage once they have embarked on what they believe to be the best course of action.
Characteristically quiet and hardworking, ISTJs have great practical judgment and memory for details. They can cite accurate evidence to support their views and apply their past experiences to their present decisions. They value and use logic and impersonal analysis, are organized and systematic in their approach to following things through and getting them done on time. They follow necessary systems and procedures and are impatient with those who do not.
ISTJs are cautious and traditional. They listen well and like things to be factual and clearly stated. They are said to “Say what you mean and mean what you say.” Private by nature, ISTJs appear calm even during times of crisis. They are duty bound and steadfast but beneath their calm facade, they may have strong yet rarely expressed reactions.
Possible Blind Spots
A common problem for ISTJs is their tendency to lose themselves in the details and daily operations of a project. Once immersed, they can be rigid and unwilling to adapt or accept another point of view. They tend to be skeptical of new ideas if they don’t see their immediate and practical application. They need to take time to look at their overall objectives and consider alternatives they may not have considered. Gathering a wider range of information and consciously trying to anticipate the future implications of their behavior will increase the ISTJ’s effectiveness in all areas.
ISTJs sometimes have trouble understanding the needs of others, especially those that are different from their own. Because they keep their reactions private, they can be perceived as cold and unfeeling. They need to express their appreciation for others directly, rather than keeping it to themselves.
Because they are logical, ISTJs tend to expect others to be so as well. They run the risk of imposing their judgments on others and overriding the opinions of less assertive people. They can demand conformity to their way of doing things and discourage more creative or innovative approaches. By staying open to untested or unconventional methods, they will develop more tolerance for differences in people, and also end up with more effective alternatives and options.
ESFJ
Extraverted, Sensing, Feeling, Judging
Approximately 9–13 percent of the American population
ESFJs are motivated to help other people in real and practical ways through direct action and cooperation. They are responsible, friendly, and sympathetic.
Because ESFJs place such importance on their relationships with other people, they tend to be popular, gracious, eager to please, and talkative. They need harmonious relationships with others and work hard to achieve and maintain them. In fact, they often idealize whatever or whomever they admire. ESFJs need to be appreciated for themselves and their service, so they are highly sensitive to indifference or criticism. They usually express strong opinions and are decisive, and they like to have things settled.
Practical and realistic, ESFJs tend to be matter-of-fact and organized. They attend to and remember important facts and details and like others to be sure of their facts as well. They base their planning and opinions on their own personal experience or that of someone else they trust. They are aware of and involved with their physical environment and like to be active and productive.
Because ESFJs are conscientious and traditional, they are bound by their sense of duty and commitments. They nurture established institutions and tend to be active and cooperative members of committees and organizations. Their social ties are important and well maintained. They often go out of their way to do something helpful and nice for someone else and especially enjoy being responsive in times of trouble or great celebration.
Possible Blind Spots
Because ESFJs value harmony so highly, they tend to avoid conflicts rather than deal with problems head-on. They sometimes place too much importance and value on the opinions and feelings of those they care for. During tense or hurtful times, they can become blind to the facts of the situation. They need to learn to deal directly and honestly with conflict, trusting that their natural sensitivity to others’ feelings will provide them with the necessary tact in even the most difficult situations.
ESFJs often overlook their own needs because of their desire to please or help other people. They have a difficult time saying no or asking for help because they don’t want to risk offending or disappointing anyone. They usually have trouble giving or accepting constructive criticism because they take things so personally. They can become pessimistic and gloomy when they don’t see ways to make changes in their lives. Taking a step back from their problems to get some objectivity usually helps them gain a fresh outlook.
In their efforts to help other people, ESFJs sometimes express their strong opinions in ways that are bossy and domineering. They do better to wait to find out if their help or suggestions are really wanted before offering them.
ESFJs often make decisions too quickly, before they’ve had adequate time to gather all the less obvious facts and consider the implications of their actions. They don’t tend to look for new or different ways of doing things and can appear inflexible. Postponing judgments in favor of staying open to novel approaches to problems will give them a better base of information and help them make better decisions.
ISFJ
Introverted, Sensing, Feeling, Judging
Approximately 9–14 percent of the American population
ISFJs are loyal, devoted, compassionate, and perceptive about how other people feel. They are conscientious and responsible and enjoy being needed.
ISFJs are down-to-earth and realistic people and prefer others who are quiet and unassuming. They absorb and enjoy using a large number of facts. With great memories for details, they are patient with the follow-through phase of tasks. ISFJs like things to be clearly and explicitly stated.
Because they have a strong work ethic, they accept responsibility for things that need to be done, if they can see that their actions will actually help. They are painstakingly accurate and systematic in handling tasks. ISFJs tend to be conservative, with traditional values. They use practical judgment in making decisions and lend stability through their excellent commonsense perspective.
Quiet and modest, ISFJs are serious and hardworking. They are gentle, sympathetic, tactful, and supportive of friends and colleagues. They like to care for others and prefer to help in practical and tangible ways. They use personal warmth to communicate, and they relate well to people in need. ISFJs tend not to show their private feelings but have an intensely personal reaction to most situations and events. They are protective and devoted to their friends, service-minded, and committed to meeting their obligations.
Possible Blind Spots
Because ISFJs live so completely in the present, they have trouble seeing events in global terms or anticipating the possible outcomes of a situation, especially when it is unfamiliar. They need help looking beyond the moment and imagining what might or could be if things were done differently.
ISFJs can become mired in the daily grind and the unending work around them, both their own and others’ for whom they feel responsible. They can easily become overworked, doing everything themselves to be sure that tasks are completed meticulously. Because they are not naturally assertive or tough-minded, they risk being taken advantage of. They need to express their frequently bottled-up feelings of resentment so they don’t find themselves in the rescuing role. They also need to let other people know their needs and their accomplishments.
ISFJs often need extra time to master technical subjects. They tend to plan excessively and need to develop strategies that will help them refocus the energy they often expend worrying. ISFJs need to find ways of getting the much-needed enjoyment and relaxation they deserve.
ESTP
Extraverted, Sensing, Thinking, Perceiving
Approximately 4–5 percent of the American population
ESTPs don’t worry—they’re happy! Active, easygoing, and spontaneous, ESTPs enjoy the present moment rather than planning for the future.
Extremely realistic, ESTPs rely on and trust what their senses tell them about their world. They are curious and keen observers. Because they accept things as they are, they tend to be open-minded and tolerant of others and themselves. ESTPs like real things that can be handled, taken apart, and put back together.
ESTPs prefer action to conversation and enjoy dealing with situations as they arise. They are good problem solvers because they can absorb necessary factual information and then find logical and sensible solutions quickly, without a lot of wasted effort or energy. They can be diplomatic negotiators, happy to try unconventional approaches and usually able to persuade other people to give their compromises a chance. They are able to grasp underlying principles and make decisions based upon what is logical, rather than on how they feel about things. Therefore they are pragmatic and can be tough when the situation warrants.
Friendly and charming, ESTPs are popular and at ease in most social situations. They are outgoing, versatile, and funny, and may have an endless supply of jokes and stories for whatever situation they find themselves in. They can be good at easing tense situations by lightening up the atmosphere and getting conflicting parties together.
Possible Blind Spots
ESTPs’ preference for living in the moment and adopting an “emergency” style of responding to unexpected crises can result in a chaotic environment for those around them. They may miss opportunities through lack of planning. They sometimes take on too much at one time and find themselves overloaded and unable to keep their commitments. ESTPs need to look beyond the current moment and their interest in the material world to try to anticipate ways of finishing tasks on time.
ESTPs also tend to overlook other people’s feelings and may be blunt and insensitive in their desire to be honest, especially when they are rushing from one experience to another. Their flamboyance can sometimes be perceived as crudeness and may alienate the people they are trying to entertain. ESTPs become more effective with other people when they direct their keen powers of observation to be sensitive to the people around them. They are more effective when they rein in their boldness, energy, and love of a good time to a level where other people are more comfortable.
More interested in solving problems quickly and effortlessly, ESTPs tend to jump directly into the next crisis and not follow through on the less-exciting portions of current projects. They do well to learn and apply time management and long-range planning techniques to help them prepare for and complete responsibilities. Slowing down to develop standards for their own behavior and considering the ramifications of their actions will make them more effective.
ISTP
Introverted, Sensing, Thinking, Perceiving
Approximately 4–6 percent of the American population
ISTPs are straightforward, honest, and pragmatic people who prefer action to conversation. They are unpretentious and often have a good understanding of the way things work.
Because they are analytical, ISTPs are most interested in the impersonal and underlying principles of things. ISTPs have an innate understanding of how mechanical things work and are usually skilled at using tools and working with their hands. They tend to make logical and private decisions, stating things clearly and directly, just as they see them.
Curious and observant, ISTPs tend to be convinced only by hard, reliable facts. They have a great respect for facts and can be veritable storehouses of information on the things they know well and understand. Because they are realists, they are able to capitalize well on available resources, which makes them practical, with a good sense of timing.
Quiet and reserved, ISTPs tend to appear cool and aloof and are inclined toward shyness, except when with good friends. They are self-leading, egalitarian, and fair. They tend to operate on impulse, so they are quite adaptable and responsive to immediate challenges and problems. Because they thrive on excitement and action, they usually like the outdoors and sports.
Possible Blind Spots
Because ISTPs make judgments privately, they often keep even the most important issues to themselves, which leaves the people in their lives in the dark about what is going on. They have difficulty sharing their reactions, feelings, and concerns with others because it seems unnecessary to them. They need to accept that other people want and need to know what is going on in their lives and realize they are the only ones who can provide an accurate explanation.
ISTPs are so realistic that they can usually see ways of minimizing effort on almost all projects. Because of their desire to have free time, they often don’t prepare more than is absolutely necessary or may not stick with a project to its conclusion. This can lead them to cut corners. Mapping out a plan, complete with all the steps and details, will help them curb their potential lack of initiative and reduce their apparent indifference.
Because ISTPs are constantly on the alert for new sensory information and prefer to keep all their options open, they may be indecisive. Their need for excitement can make them reckless and also easily bored. Setting goals and making serious commitments to people and things will help them avoid the common disappointments and dangers of such a potentially haphazard lifestyle.
ESFP
Extraverted, Sensing, Feeling, Perceiving
Approximately 4–9 percent of the American population
ESFPs enjoy people and have a real zest for living. They are playful and vivacious, and make things more fun for others by their pure and unabashed enjoyment.
Adaptable and easygoing, ESFPs are warm, friendly, and generous. They are extremely sociable and are often “on stage” with others. They enthusiastically and cooperatively join in activities and games and are usually juggling several activities at once.
ESFPs are realistic observers and see and accept things as they are. They tend to trust what they can hear, smell, taste, touch, and see instead of theoretical explanations. Because they like concrete facts and have good memories for details, they learn best from hands-on experience. Their common sense gives them practical abilities with people and things. They prefer to gather information and see what solutions naturally arise.
Tolerant and accepting of themselves and others, ESFPs don’t tend to try to impose their will on other people. Tactful and sympathetic, ESFPs are generally and genuinely liked by many people. They are usually able to get people to adopt their suggestions, so they are good at helping conflicting fac“tions get back together. They seek out the company of others and are good conversationalists. They enjoy helping other people but prefer to assist in real and tangible ways.
Spontaneous and charming, ESFPs are persuasive. They love surprises and finding ways of bringing delight and unexpected pleasure to others.
Possible Blind Spots
Because ESFPs place such a strong priority on experiencing and enjoying life, they sometimes allow their other responsibilities to suffer. Their constant socializing can interfere and get them into trouble and because they are so easily tempted, they have difficulty disciplining themselves. ESFPs’ tendency to become distracted from finishing the tasks they start can make them lazy. By working to prioritize their activities, and finding a balance between work and play, they will gain a broader perspective and longer-range vision for their lives. Using successful and accepted methods of organization and time management helps them overcome this natural predisposition.
Their active life keeps them so busy, they fail to plan ahead. This can leave them unprepared for life’s changes that would be easier to cope with if clues of their approach had been noticed. ESFPs need to try to anticipate what might be coming down the road and develop an alternative plan in case things become unpleasant.
ESFPs also tend to make decisions without considering the logical consequences of their actions. Their own personal feelings are trusted and used to the exclusion of more objective data. Friends are so highly valued by ESFPs that they tend to look only at their positive sides. ESFPs need to take a step back to consider the cause and effect of actions and work toward becoming more tough-minded. Saying no will not be nearly as difficult if they do.
ISFP
Introverted, Sensing, Feeling, Perceiving
Approximately 5–9 percent of the American population
ISFPs are gentle, caring, and sensitive people, who keep much of their intensely personal ideals and values to themselves. They more often express their deeply felt passions through actions than through words.
Modest and reserved, ISFPs are really tremendously warm and enthusiastic people but tend not to show that side of themselves except with people they know well and trust fully. ISFPs tend to be misunderstood because of their tendency not to express themselves directly.
ISFPs are patient, flexible, and easy to get along with and have little need to dominate or control others. They are nonjudgmental and accepting of others’ behavior in a rather matter-of-fact way. They are observant of people and things around them and do not seek to find motives or meanings.
Because ISFPs live completely in the present moment, they do not tend to prepare or plan more than is necessary. Good short-range planners, they are relaxed about getting things done because they are fully engaged in the here and now and like to enjoy the current experience without rushing on to the next.
Interested in what they learn and sense directly from their experiences and senses, they are often artistic and aesthetic, and seek to create beautiful and personal environments for themselves.
Without the need to lead, ISFPs are often loyal followers and good team members. Because they use their personal values to judge everything in life, they like other people who take the time to get to know them and understand their inner loyalties. Basically trusting and understanding, they need harmonious relationships in their lives and are sensitive to conflicts and disagreements.
Possible Blind Spots
The highly sensitive nature of ISFPs allows them to clearly see the needs of other people, and they sometimes work so excessively to fulfill those needs that they neglect themselves in the process. This can result in their becoming physically ill from exhaustion and overwork. They need to take time out from caring for others to take care of themselves.
Because they focus so completely on their experience in the moment, they tend not to look beyond the present, and miss the broader view. They sometimes have difficulty understanding things in a more complex context. Because they don’t usually look for or see possibilities that don’t exist at the present time, they don’t tend to prepare in advance. They often have trouble organizing their time and resources. They may have to work hard to curb their impulse to go off and enjoy a quiet moment, or participate in a favorite activity.
ISFPs are vulnerable to the criticism of others because they tend to take feedback personally and become offended and discouraged. They may be seen as gullible and too trusting because they accept people and things as they are and don’t expect a malicious motive or read anything else into them. They need to become more assertive about their own needs and consider the implications of another’s behavior. By applying some objectivity and skepticism to their analysis, they can become better judges of character.
 
