Trunk
Connecting Your Past to Your Future

Table of Contents
Overview	2
Day 1 – Finding The Light	3
How You Are	3
Your Values	4
Day 2 – Reality	7
Creator’s Mentality	8
Action Triggers	10
Reframing Failure	13
Day 3 – Landmarking	14
New Growth	14
Reading the Leaves	15
Making Choices	16
Day 4 – Launching Pad	18
Framework	18
Support	18
Unknowns	18
Day 5 – Story Weaving	20
Choosing Your Level	21
Persuasive Story Telling	22
Drafting Your Story	28



Overview
Now that you have taken stock of your literal makeup and background, it is time to take a higher level view of who you are, how you are doing, and where your life is going. If you are unsure about the path ahead, that is okay. If you are confident you know where your path leads, that is okay too. Go through each exercise with an open mind. If you are searching for answers, this process will guide you through finding them. If you are decided and confident, this will provide reassurance, perspective, and ensure that you did your due diligence. Just as with the roots, understanding where you are can only help you reach greater heights. 
The trunk of our tree represents the present. This is where your past meets your future. In many respects, the present is the only thing that genuinely exists. Everything else is an interpretation. Your mission is to interpret your situation to your benefit and steer towards your best possible future. 
There is no possible way to know every effect of each and every choice we make. Therefore, it is impossible to make the best decision in every instance. So, we gather as much information as is needed, and then we make a choice. Bias to Action. 
Approach this week with an open mind. A lot of this will be brainstorming. When brainstorming, defer to quantity over quality. We have all sorts of social filters which hinder most people from thinking creatively. Your job is to ignore anything that tells you something is a bad idea and write it down anyways. 
There will be a time and a place for evaluation, but first, you need to generate as many ideas as possible. While the most outlandish ideas don’t always seem useful, they open the door for creativity, and can often lead to innovation. Remember, many of the most incredible discoveries were made by accident, open yourself up to those accidents. 

	*** You are going to need a small group of people who know you but do not think they know what you need to do for your next step in life. 2-3 other people works best, but even one will help tremendously. ***

Day 1 – Finding The Light
Every plant grows towards the light. The light is nourishing for trees. 
You, too, must reach towards your light. Once you identify what your light is, it will guide you through your decision-making process. Anytime you have a decision to make your light will tell you which way to go, grow towards the light. So, what is your light? What is nourishing for you?
How You Are
Building on last week, you are going to write a brief summary of each of the four main parts of your life. You will then evaluate each part out of ten. Give marks according to how you see fit. 
Write a Summary
Mark out of 10
1. Work


2. Play


3. Love


4. Health


5. Overall, how are you?




Your Values
It is time to identify your light and begin to understand the compass that will guide you into the future. 
There are two main values to consider, your work values and your life values. Values are not a description of what you want, or what you are seeking. This is philosophical. Reflect on the deeper meaning. There are no wrong answers, except for blank answers. 

Work
1. What does work mean to you?


2. Why do you work?


3. Why do other people work?


4. What is the purpose of people working?


5. Other than money, what is gained from work?


6. Are honor, growth, or fulfillment essential to work? Explain.


7. What work would you do if all your needs were guaranteed?



Life
1. Is there a meaning of life? Give details.


2. What is the meaning of your life?


3. Why do we exist?


4. What is good?


5. What is evil?


6. What is happiness?


7. Is there a higher being?


8. Why do we experience pain and suffering?


9. Is there some deeper meaning, mission, or purpose to life?


10. What injustices are there in the world?
Alignment
The most fulfilling lives grow from the place where life views and work views overlap. In other words, if your work values compliment your life values, your life will have more value. 
1. Where do your two value systems support each other?


2. Where do they disagree?


3. Is one more important to you than the other? Which one? Why?


4. In your own words, explain how your work values and your life values work together.




You spend a tremendous amount of your life working. The more closely your work supports your values, the more rewarding your life will be. The overlap between your work values and your life values is where your light shines the brightest. The closer your work, the way you spend your productive time, compliments your values, the more rewarding your life will be. 
If you are unclear on what you value, talk to people who know you well, or research your idols’ values and compare your values to their values. This alignment is the light you are using to guide the next steps in your life, be diligent. 
If you find yourself stuck, practice free writing several potential answers to the questions. Then, choose which solution is best for you or combine them to create another. This doesn’t need to be a world-altering philosophy, but you do need to clarify your values. 


Day 2 – Reality
There are many things which are outside of our control in life. It is best if we let them be. Accept them as they are, and work around them. I am not saying that we should not fight injustices or work to right the wrongs in the world. Quite the contrary, we should understand what cannot be changed so that we may be productive in our efforts to support our values. 
For example, there is bias and discrimination in most hiring processes. While these issues do need to be addressed and rectified, we would be foolish to act as though they do not exist. 
There are two main approaches to finding the next job. 

The first is the one you likely know: write your resume, find a job opening, apply to every position you can with your carefully crafted documents, wait in the dark, then (if you’re super lucky) you might get an email initiating the interview process.  The first interviews are screening; the employer is just looking for reasons to narrow down the list. The final interview is when you get the chance to build a bond and sell yourself as an actual human who brings more to the table than a list of skills.
 There are a TON of reasons this doesn’t work, but the important thing is, for all intents and purposes, this doesn’t work. Incentives are misaligned at every step of this process. For example, you are not a list of skills; the person writing job descriptions is either looking for the person who just left (with none of the downside) or doesn't fully understand what the position calls for. The process makes it incredibly challenging to showcase or find qualities which genuinely predict success. Meanwhile, it's often a charade because the position has already been filled through the second method. 
The second one is the one that works, networking. I am not here to debate the ethics of this, only to share the reality of it. Most employers look inside their organization first, then they either target people they have found or already know, or they defer to people who are referred by trustworthy workers within the organization. Employers around the world have found that this is the surest way to find good hires. So, this is the method we use.

Creator’s Mentality
Rather than waiting for the perfect job to fall into your lap, you are going to create your own opportunity. The best way to create opportunity is to have a plan and to live the five mindsets I mentioned last week.
Curiosity – Be curious. You are going to be speaking to people. People love to feel interesting. Being genuinely interested in the people you are talking to will make every interaction you have, a more positive one. Further, if you are genuinely curious about the people you are speaking with, then you are more likely to be talking to the right people. Research is professional curiosity. Discovery is what comes from curiosity.  Be curious. Do all your research, then find more questions to answer. Curiosity is the spirit of authentic connections. The best, and most effective, networking is authentic. 
Bias to action – When it is time, take action. When in doubt, take action. You can research and postulate and imagine all day every day. A certain amount of preparation is good and necessary, but preparation has diminishing returns. Sooner rather than later, you need to go out and take action on your postulations. Make a hypothesis, test your hypothesis, observe the effects, iterate, and improve. We can only truly learn through action. 
Reframing – otherwise known as a change of perspective. Some problems are insurmountable. Most problems are opportunities. Learning to see obstacles as opportunities will pay dividends in all aspects of life. An example, 
Before → “I have applied to every job I qualify for, and none of them are answering me. I will never find a job.”
After → “I have tried applying for jobs using traditional methods. I need to change how I am looking for a job.”
Awareness – The human brain is always looking for ways to optimize. Think of your daily commute. While you are on your commute, you probably do not notice much of what is going on around you, unless it is extraordinary. The very first time you took the commute was likely a small adventure, fraught with new stimuli, and the excitement of your new job ahead. Now that you have made the trip so many times, your brain does not waste the energy it takes to observe every little thing, it assumes you know what is essential and only pays attention to those things. Attention is a trillion dollar business; companies spend a tremendous amount on advertising; the entertainment industry is massive. Know the difference between awareness and distraction. The more aware you are of what is going on around you, the more likely you are to recognize opportunity when it comes. Not everything that glitters is gold. Awareness means knowing the difference. 
Radical collaboration – People. Know that everything in the world of work and creation is made up of people. Every institution, every group, everything, is made up of people. The most abundant resource you have is not the internet. It is the people you know. Don’t be afraid to tap into the genius and perspective around you. Flow is when an individual performs at an extremely high level. Yet, no individual can accomplish what a group working together can. Every potential job will have gatekeepers; secretaries, HR representatives, hiring managers, and future co-workers are all people. Each interview is a two-way conversation. You are working together to find out if you can work well together. 

1. Find a character from a book, series, movie, or real life for each mindset. The mindset should be that character’s defining quality.



2. Defend your choices. Explain how and why these characters exemplify the mindset. Give examples.


3. What does embodying the mindset help the character to accomplish?



Action Triggers
1. Focus on the task at hand. The one who chases two rabbits catches none.
2. Use the skills you have, not the ones you don’t. A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.
3. Find your inspiration. Reproduce or create your most successful scenarios.
4. Set your intentions and follow through.
5. Aim for the moon, if you miss you’ll land in the stars.
6. Embrace fear. Get comfortable being uncomfortable. Move through fear into the unknown. 
7. Take massive action. Hypothesize, act, observe, adjust, iterate. 
8. Persevere. Be relentless. Never stop. Remember that the tortoise beats the hare.

I want you to aim for the moon. So, now, define your “moon”. Be specific. How much wealth? How much income? What material desires? What organizations, businesses, or non-profits need to exist? What connections do you need to make? Dream it all, and write it all down here. 


1. What do you need to survive?


2. How would a comfortable life for you look?


3. What does happiness mean to you?


4. What is your definition of success?


5. If you had three wishes, what would they be?


6. Describe your dream life.


7. What are you willing to do to achieve your standards?


8. What strikes fear into your bones?


9. Detail some actions you think you could take to conquer those fears.


10. What situation over the next year are you afraid of failing?


11. Give three opportunistic perspectives on that situation.


12. Brainstorm actions you could take to excel in that situation.


13. Describe a time you overcame your fear.


14. Have you ever had an authority figure who motivated you? What about that person motivated you?


15. What is the worst possible situation you can accept for your life?


16. Describe the last time you were down. (Financially, emotionally, in performance, you choose your frame)


17. What did you do to improve your situation?


18. What could you have down better?



Reframing Failure
Failure is no longer an end. Life is not a pass or fail test. Sometimes, things do not work the way we expect. So, either change what you expect or change the way it works. Reframing failure is an extension of being mindful. 
1. Using the Reframing Failure worksheet (in resources), look back over the last week (or month or year), and log your failures.
2. Label them as screwups, weaknesses, or growth opportunities.
3. Reframe each as an opportunity for growth.
4. Repeat at the end of each week to build the habit of reflection and growth

Often, life is a numbers game. If you try enough times, eventually something will work. You need to go a step beyond random trials. Record your mishaps, reflect on them, and adjust your behavior accordingly. Do not fail the same way twice. Learn from science, pay close attention to all the variables involved. Failure is not an end; it is a means to learn. 
Practice reframing in your daily life. Change your perspective to see opportunity in every instance. Lost your keys?  Memory exercise. Family argument? Practice diplomacy, communication, and negotiation. Not enough time? Streamline for efficiency. Decide to view the world from a place of possibility by repeatedly choosing perspectives which are acceptable to you. Practicing mindfulness, pausing to take a few deep breaths and settling your mind, will help you to see aspects of any situation which you might otherwise overlook. 

Day 3 – Landmarking
I cannot state enough how impactful today’s activities can be, no matter how far along you are in your process. By opening your mind to your own ideas and building neural paths to stimulate and support creativity, you are practicing one of the most highly valued skills in the information economy – innovation. The more earnestly you engage with these activities, the more you will get out of the entire process. 
New Growth
When plants grow, they send out shoots in many directions. They don’t reach in every direction, but they give themselves plenty of opportunities, knowing that not all of them will grow into significant parts of the plant. 
For this step, you are going to create three idea trees. For each, start with a blank piece of paper and a pen or pencil. The process is simple, don’t overthink it. As before, the important thing right now is quantity. We, as people, make better choices when we can choose between multiple options. So, keep your judgment to the side as best as you can. 
You are going to start with the trunk. Then, add 3-4 branches. Next, each branch gets 3-4 more branches. Finally, one more round of branches. If any of these last ones beg for their own branches, follow your heart and give them some. 
Each bunch of branches only needs to be related to its parent branch, not the branches before it, not the other branches, and not the trunk. 
DO NOT CENSOR YOUR IDEAS. ALL IDEAS ARE WELCOME. You cannot know if it is a bad idea or a good idea during the exercise, do not pass judgment on any ideas during this stage. 

To make your idea trees, read and then follow the directions below:

1. Get blank pieces of paper.
2. Review the topics or situations which both energize and captivate you (Week 1, Day 3), and choose the three which interest and engage you the most for your starting words. 
3. Write your first word in the middle of your first piece of blank paper. Circle it. This is your starter. You now have the trunk of your idea tree. 
4. Read the word. Write 3-4 words related to your starter. Write the first words you think of. This is your first layer of branches. 
5. Read each word in your first layer. Write 3-4 words related to each word in your first layer of branches. Write the first words you think of. This is your second layer of branches.
6. Read each word in your second layer. Write 3-4 words related to each word in your second layer of branches. Write the first words you think of. This is your third layer of branches.
7. If you believe any words from the third layer of branches need branches of their own, write down your ideas.
8. Repeat 3-7 for your second and third starting words.

Reading the Leaves
You are now going to take the ideas you have generated and brainstorm jobs that combine them. This doesn’t need to be realistic. The point of this exercise is to practice exploring ideas. Imagination is the key. There is no right or wrong answer. Remember, this is only a step on your path; you do not need to have the best ideas in the world, only to practice creating new opportunities. 
For example, let’s say the three ideas I choose from my first idea tree are as follows: dogs, economics, and mountains. I could breed and sell dogs in the mountains. I could start a business for dog and owner retreats, in the mountains. I could open a dog kennel with a mountain theme. 
Another example. Let’s say the three ideas I choose from my second idea tree are as follows: travel, dance, and teaching. I could teach different styles of dance from around the world. I could find and exhibit various forms of dance from around the world on a youtube channel. I could start a club encouraging the exchange of dance ideas across cultures. 

You have these three “trees” with all sorts of interconnected ideas on them. 
Start with just one tree. 
I want you to pick three ideas from the outmost layer of branches. Pick them with genuine interest. Which of your ideas captivate you?
Then, think of jobs that combine all three of those ideas. 
Repeat for each tree. 

It is entirely possible that you just stumbled upon a great idea or even a few great ideas. If that is you, CONGRATULATIONS.
If not, don’t worry. Most people don’t. 
If you found this activity completely pointless, you may want to consider your perspective. The point is not to be right or wrong. The goal is to open up your mind to possibilities. You might not move into these professions, but it is a healthy and beneficial practice. 
The goal is to get used to generating ideas without judgment. Imagination is the essence of creativity; creativity is the basis of innovation.



Making Choices
Now you are going to make a few decisions. For some, this will be easy. For others, this will be a painstaking process. Take your time and sincerely consider your options. There is no right answer. The average worker will change jobs more than ten times in their life. Most people completely change careers a couple of times. There are multiple lives that you could live that might bring you joy for years to come. Also, there is no way to know if you will love or hate something until you go out and try it, so don’t write anything off just because it sounds silly. 
Life is a bit like looking up from the trunk of a tree. Look for the leaves you want to reach, and go that direction. Most paths don’t lead straight to the leaves you want, there are many decisions to make between where you are and where you want to go. 
It is time to make some real decisions. 
Design and plan three full options for your future. You are not choosing a specific place to work. You are picking a profession. Do not consider the actual place of employment, that is not the task. The task is to choose professions. Underwater Welder. High school Spanish teacher. Quality control manager for toy manufacturers. 
You are going to want three options. Life is unpredictable and full of opportunities. Like a tree in nature, the sun does not only shine from one place. There are multiple directions you could grow, and each of them will give you a healthy and robust life. You are not a bamboo shoot, do not limit yourself to only one choice. All people make better decisions when there are a few options on the board. 
In the last activity, Reading The Leaves, you came up with a variety of ideas. It would be best if you seriously considered those ideas. They were generated from connections to productive activities that make you tic. You might not have found your passion during the activity, but there is a good chance you could become passionate about one of the prospects you imagined. 
When making your choices, you will want to consider your skills and talents, but keep in mind that you can usually learn more skills than you expect on the job. There are jobs which have strict entrance requirements, like doctors. So, maybe you can’t just become a doctor, but there are entire industries which work very closely with doctors and patients, most of which do not require such extensive preparation. Every industry has multiple layers, search for ones that fit your skills and potential. If you have ten years to become a doctor, by all means, go for it, if not, consider becoming a nurse or joining a medical equipment sales team. 
More often than not, someone somewhere has taken an unconventional path to realize their dream. There are many paths, do not judge, doubt, or censor something that stands out in your mind because you cannot see the way at this time. 
The first is your first choice, the one that meets your real-world needs and utilizes your skills and interests the most. For some, this is a clear and obvious choice, the exercises up to now have only solidified your direction. If that is not you, look back at your ranked lists of skills, consider your work priorities, and weigh them against your compass. Where could life shine the brightest for you? What job could provide you with the most growth? For help answering those questions, discuss your Roots and your New Growth Leaves with some trustworthy people you are close to. 
The second would be your first choice if the first one didn’t exist. This one should be just as good as the first, but definitively different. 
The third one would be your choice if there were no restraining factors (no financial needs, no location dependence, no qualifications needs, etc.). This is your chance to write down the long shot. Maybe you love the idea, but don’t think you have a chance at landing that position. Perhaps it is way outside of your current skill set, but you think it would engage you like nothing else ever has. The third is my favorite pick of the three. There are several ways to make significant changes in our lives, and many paths that most people don’t see at first. We will discuss this option more down the road, for now, take the long shot. 


1.





2.





3. 

Day 4 – Launching Pad
Plan out each of your ideas from the previous exercise. 
Use the “Launching Pad” worksheet in the resource pack to complete this exercise. 
You will do the same three steps for each of your three choices. 
Framework
First, make a timeline for this plan. Include work events and life events. If you cannot immediately move into this position, including how you think you can grow towards your goal and when you will achieve it. Five years is a good guideline. 
Then, once you have designed a timeline, give this life option, this branch of your tree, a complete and accurate title. Describe your potential life in a way that suits you now, your roots, and this future. 
Support 
Gauge each of the following out of 10 (0 being little to none, 10 being extremely strong)
Give detailed examples and explain in as much detail as you can where necessary. 
    1. Resources
        a. time – do you have the time to pull this off?
        b. Funding – do you need any additional funds, are there any financial risks you are taking?
        c. Skills – do you already have all the necessary skills, or are there some you still need to learn?
        d. Contacts – do you know anyone doing this? Do you know anyone in the industry?
    2. Excitement – are you excited about this prospect? When you imagine this life unfolding in front of you, how does it make you feel?
    3. Confidence – How confident are you in this prospect?
    4. Coherence – How inline with your work values and your life values is this idea? 
    5. Work Needs – consider your work priorities and all the pieces from week 1. Does this idea support your roots? Consider location, financial needs, and any other areas of importance to you.
    6. Discovery – what will you learn from this journey? What is the impact of choosing this path?
Unknowns
It is crucial that you approach your future with genuine curiosity. You need to have some questions you are seeking answers to as you move down any path in life. I have given you some starting points, but these do not need to be your questions. Write 2-5 good questions. 
What is uncertain?
What will you need to learn to be successful on this path?
What ideas or realities will you explore on this path?
What are you going to learn from pursuing this path?


Day 5 – Story Weaving
To finish this week, you will be constructing your story. You have analyzed your past, identified your compass, and laid out three potential futures. Now, it is time to connect the dots and form a  cohesive and coherent story which presents you in the best and most accurate light possible. If you are not entirely satisfied with what you think your story is, then you are not looking at it in the right light. Every single person has a good story to tell, seeing and understanding yours is a matter of perspective and construction. 
First, you will aim for a certain level of competency, are you looking to run a corporation, or are you hoping to work on a design team? There is no right answer in the first section, but it is important that you and I both understand where you are aiming. 
Then you will learn the basics of persuasive storytelling. Not only do you want to tell your story, but you want that story to convince your audience of something, particularly that you are fantastic and will accomplish the goals that you have set out. 
The last thing you need to do today is to write a full draft of your story. Shape and record the story that you tell yourself. It should be positive, accurate, follow your “light,” and convince even your harshest critics that you are an impressive individual (according to your needs). From this story, you will construct your elevator pitch, and decipher the best ways to approach your upcoming interviews. Weave together all the pieces of your life and learn to present your story as the masterpiece it is.

Choosing Your Level
The purpose of this exercise is to determine the level of business you are targeting. Are you an executive who enjoys the big picture or are you best served dealing with your own needs? Not one of these is notably better than the other, but each level does have different responsibilities requiring different preparation. While it can be difficult to pigeon hole some real-world roles into particular categories, you should do your best to identify which level you are the most prepared for. 
Level 1 is typically associated with jobs such as Assistants, Secretaries, Technicians, and Operators. 
Level 2 is typically associated with jobs such as Statisticians, Corporate Management and Administration Assistants/Officers, Logistics Officers, Engineers, and Documentations. 
Level 3 is typically associated with jobs such as Economists, Policy Analysts, IT Analysts, Developers, and HR Advisers. 
Level 4 is typically associated with jobs such as Senior Economists, Senior Analysts, Leads, or Managers. 
Level 5 is typically associated with jobs such as Heads of Division, Counsellors, Deputy Directors, C level Officers, and Directors. 
Your specific role may not be listed. If that is the case, make the best estimation you can, based on the examples given. 
Once you have estimated your level, see my Competency Framework (in the Resources) and read through the qualifications for your level. 
If you are unclear on some of the objectives, that is okay. Be as confident as possible that most of them are accurate for you. We will discuss this first thing at our next meeting. 
Adjust your estimated level accordingly. You will want to be able to demonstrate ability, success, or excellence for each point associated with your level. 

Persuasive Story Telling
1.
 The first thing to understand when crafting a persuasive story is the “why.” Why are you telling this story? Storytelling is an ancient art passed down for thousands of generations. According to some sociologists, it is a fundamental building block of humanity, a building block of society.
In more relevant terms, a story is the most effective way to communicate any complex ideas. Coming out and telling your prospective boss that you are a hard worker is lame and ineffective. Rather than touting your accomplishments, put your audience in your shoes, appeal to their empathy, make them feel what you felt from your point of view, and lead them to the conclusions you want.
By nature, humans identify patterns. As a result of our evolution, we design all sorts of algorithms to help us save time and energy. Most people assume (unconsciously or consciously) that microcosms reflect macrocosms. In fact, that is the basis of the entire traditional interview process. We boil down our lives to one piece of paper for employers to screen for a 15-minute interaction where both parties make life-altering decisions with consequences which play out over several years. 
A single well told and well-chosen story will give your audience a firm idea of who you are, what your morals are, what you stand for, and how worthy of their time and resources you are. The interview process is essentially the employers attempt to find and understand your story in the most efficient manner possible. Our job is to craft an honest story that leads them to the conclusions we need them to find. 
The key to a good story is authenticity. Accounts that are relatable and real are the most impressionable. Being liked is not your job; your responsibility is to demonstrate your character. While you should consider your audience (their needs, desires, etc., we will cover this more, later), your main goal is to demonstrate who you are. Respect is much more powerful than being liked. If you are not a good fit, but they like you then maybe you are offered a job that is not good for you. If you are not a good fit, but they respect you, then perhaps you are given a referral to a job that will be the perfect fit. 
Be who you are, not whom you think you are supposed to be. Refer back to your compass, your light. You want your story to demonstrate coherence.  You do not need to have been following some mystical compass or to have known your passion throughout your life for this to be effective, accurate, and authentic. Your mission is to craft a storyline that makes sense of the events in your life while showing some commitment to your internal compass.
Your message, your values, your actions, and your direction in life should all resonate together as one. Among other things, this will help your story to be more complete, and therefore, easier for the audience to comprehend. 
What do you want to achieve by telling your story?




2.
The second big step is to identify your purpose. A life with purpose is a life worth living. You are telling this story to relay your life mission and your constitution to your audience. So, the more precise and authentic your purpose is, the more compelling your story will be.
Take a look at your life, the work you have done, and all you have accomplished. What themes tie all of them together? If you are struggling for a clear answer, reflect on the activities you have completed before this for help. 
Reflect upon your roots and your value compass. Consider your life values and your work values, the theme you want to identify is one that draws a line between the two. No one is perfect, so remember that you are a work in progress. Be forgiving of your faults and allow yourself to see your best qualities. 
You might come up with things like “pursuit of excellence,” “multicultural understanding,” or “scientific innovation”. When I did this exercise, I found “economic justice”, “improved education”, and “growth through dialogue”. 
Your purpose might be money, sports, wealth, legacy, environment, fighting poverty, sobriety, religion, exploration, security, stability, or anything else imaginable. It does not matter what it is, only that you identify one as clearly as possible. 
This decision is not permanent. In fact, it is perfectly okay and normal to change direction, to shift the meaning you find in life. You might accomplish your goals, find a greater purpose, or completely lose interest. That is all perfectly okay. Today, your job is to identify a mission, a message to build your story around. It does not have to be your campaign until the end of time, but it does need to make sense in the context of your life. The more your current “life’s meaning” resonates with all the parts of your past, the stronger your story will be. 
The theme you identify should have meaning to you. You may find it inspiring, and you might be extremely passionate about the subject you identify. You might not. At the very least, the theme needs to make sense to you. If it does not make sense to you, it won’t make sense to anyone else. 
Finding clarity in your purpose serves you in many ways. First of all, and maybe most importantly, is that it is easier to live a happy life when you believe your life has meaning. The meaning gives you direction and will make difficult decisions easier. Reflect upon your compass from week one, attempt to peer up and down your path to see where you have been, where you are going, and the ideas that tie the aggregate of past, present, and immediate future you, together.
Think of yourself as a character in a story. Take an outside view of your life and do your best to describe your character. Do not expect to find the perfect answer. Strive to find a plot, a few explanations, or a series of allegories which make sense of your story. Start broad, then work to narrow your definition until you have a concise record that you feel good about. 
Brainstorm, make notes and generate ideas now. 









In 10 words or less, what is the theme or meaning that ties your life together? 




3.
The third part to telling a persuasive story is the actual content of the story. The story needs to be consistent and coherent while demonstrating your values and purpose.
One of the most effective ways of achieving this is to focus on the turning points of your life. What stories from your past helped to shape you into the person you are today? These times, generally from childhood, demonstrate that you are a human, who possibly overcame something significant. The story needs to give a glimpse of the deeper feelings within you and how you were affected. When choosing your turning point story, focus on a time that demonstrates a significant disruption, a reaction, and overcoming. 
You want to demonstrate a balanced life. While remaining authentic, you (most probably) do not want to describe yourself as a bohemian, but you want to avoid being perceived as a robot as well. You need to display your human nature while preserving your professionalism. 
The story you tell should almost certainly be one of triumph. Positivity and success tend to resonate the way we want them to. Prospective employers likely won’t be drawn to someone who builds their identity around failure. With that said, do not gloat, brag, or be overly self-congratulatory. Your story needs to be about a positive success without being too cocky. Overstating your achievements will turn your audience off, and make them doubt your credibility. Whenever possible, exhibit humility. Giving credit to those who were involved in your successes will display humility while painting you as a good team player. 
Emotion is significantly stronger than reason. Appealing to empathy is a shortcut to building trustworthy relationships. To engage your audience emotionally, your story needs to include some emotional reality for you. Emotions add depth to the story, making them more engaging, and to your character, making you a better job candidate. Again, unless your profession calls for it, this should be done in moderation. You want to maintain your air of professionalism while displaying your human nature.
Humor is a powerful tool. Using limited humor shows mastery over your faults, and can display an appropriate level of emotion and sensitivity. Job hunting, networking, and preparing for interviews are not the time for inappropriate jokes of any sort. Slander and bigotry are not acceptable. Do not demean others. Do not point out the faults of others. Do not laugh at the expense of others. 
Context is everything. Identity stories are typically colorful, evoking the sights and sounds and smells of the setting in which the story is told. The goal of your full-length story is to immerse your audience. Construct a visceral, emotionally relatable story which demonstrates your drive and mission through overcoming some significant obstacle. Being overly descriptive can be annoying, and possibly a pointless endeavor. Your goal is not to be Emerson. Preferably, choose essential details and describe them explicitly, you want to evoke the feeling of being where you were. You do not need to list every blade of grass. You need to help the listener get in your shoes. 
- List 3-10 evocative stories from your past, these can be stories you have already used for this training (remember, you have a better chance of making a good choice when you are choosing from a field of options. Coming up with a range of stories can be difficult, but will pay dividends down the road)



- Quickly jot down emotions, adjectives, and other vital descriptors associated with each story



- Describe the life lesson you learned in every story, using six words or less for each



- How does each of these life lessons tie into the theme of your life? Be explicit. 




4.
The final thing to consider when constructing a persuasive story is your audience. Prepare your story to fit your audience. Otherwise, you may think you are communicating one idea while they hear something completely different. 
That said, this is not the most compelling tactic of persuasive storytelling; the preeminent objective is portraying your authentic humanity. The reason you need to consider your audience is that people are empathetic to situations with which they can relate. For example, if you are sharing an experience about writing code with sales associates, the monotony of drafting 10,000 lines of code will likely fall on deaf ears. To better your chances, consider what struggles the salespeople have overcome themselves. For instance, tell your coding story from the angle of overcoming denial and repeated failure to reach eventual triumph. While they may not be able to relate to writing code, they know what it is to overcome the word “no.” The story is still about coding, but it is told with respect for the audience and the challenges they face. 
Every person, every organization, has a story that comprises their identity. To prepare, you will research each of the interactions you have before you have them. Study your audiences, learn their stories, and estimate where they are in the process of their story. People like to hear about themselves without being told who they are. Do not tell them where they are or who they are, and do not be presumptive. Learn about them so that you can present yourself in a manner that best fits their needs, without fabrication. 
While you are in any constructive conversation, you need to be listening as much as you are speaking. All interactions should be 50-50. You have to make sure that they hear the story you are telling. The only way to know that is by paying attention, being interactive, and never making assumptions. If you are unsure, ask questions. It is much better to ask a question to ensure solid communication than to give a lengthy explanation only to find that you have entirely lost your audience. 
You may admit that you researched them if it comes up, but you will never explicitly tell them you analyzed their story intending to shape your storytelling to fit their needs best. 
The best stories align you, the people in the room, and the organization at large into a cohesive and logical picture. Just like your best life aligns your life values and your work values, the best hire and the best job aligns the stories of all who are involved. Upon hearing your story, the audience should come to the natural conclusion that you are the perfect fit. Tell your story in a way that demonstrates how well you fit without explicitly saying it.  
In our conversations to come, practice this art. In every conversation you have, practice this art.  Research, listen, seek understanding, and align coherent storylines to develop rapport. The best conversations, the ones that lay the foundations for fruitful relationships, resemble a sort of shared flow between the involved parties. 
Think of the best conversations you have ever had. Do you remember what you spoke about? Maybe you do. Do you remember how it felt? I am referring to the conversations that create the deepest friendships, the ones which are the foundations of love and family, the moments that seem timeless. Take 10-15 minutes to reflect upon the times in your life where you felt like you had complete understanding and trust with another individual. 
…
The most influential communicators in the world harness that rapport and bring it into their lives. It is the buzz you get from talking with an excellent salesman, the feeling of the most promising first date, the energy created around an inspiring leader. That energy drives people to action and creates trustworthy bonds. Creating that energy between you and potential employers is an excellent way to assure a positive outcome. It may not guarantee a job, but if you create a genuine connection, you will be able to reap some benefit from the interaction (referral, industry relationship, etc.).
The best way to create that energy is to listen, be curious, and to be genuine. You cannot fabricate excellent rapport. It must be built. You have to be completely present in the situation in order to better, even perfect, your ability to build rapport with people is to practice. 
Every conversation you have from now on, you need to practice building genuine rapport. Listen when people are talking. Do not use, or even hold, your phone when you are in a conversation. Ask meaningful questions every time you have a conversation. Do this all the time. With your spouse, your children, your family, your friends, customer service, servers, baristas, co-workers, everyone. The more you practice, the easier it will be. The better you get at this, the more opportunities you will have.
You do not need to be an extravert for this to be effective. In fact, extraverts may find genuinely listening more difficult than their counterparts. The key is listening. Listen to the words people say. Understand and consider the story that people are living. Pay attention to body language. Recognize intention and implication. 
- Record 2-5 times you built a fantastic rapport with someone


Drafting Your Story
The acronym I teach for storytelling is SOARED. I don’t just want you to describe a time you were successful, tell stories of when you truly soared. 
Situation. Obstacle. Action. Results. Evaluation. Discovery. 

Situation – describe the setting, what was happening
Obstacle – what was the problem, the disruption, which had to be overcome
Action – what action did you take to surmount the obstacle
Results – what was the result of your action, was the problem solved or not
Evaluation – did you do everything you could have, what did you miss or how did you succeed
Discovery – in hindsight, what have you learned from the event

You can use this for these stories. Use this method when answering questions in interviews. SOARED will ensure that you don’t miss any critical details while keeping the answer logical, orderly, and natural. 

To complete this task, you are going to write two stories. You will present both stories to me at our next meeting. Both need to follow and consider all of the counsel given previously, to the best of your ability. 
1.
The first story is your identity story. Not an autobiography. It should be about 1 page typed and needs to make sense of your values, work history, future goals, and your life mission. It is the story you tell yourself, the ideal which you try to live by. We will build off of this story to create your resume, elevator pitch, and your general presentation, it does not need to be any of those yet. Explain your roots, how they made you who you are, and how you have grown into to intentional and capable person that you are today. You may not feel as though you have a cohesive story. Today is your opportunity to create that story. Take your time and revisit this task occasionally. To move forward in the process, you need to have an explicitly written identity today. Write your story now. 


2.
The second story is an allegory. It is the full expression of number three from “persuasive storytelling”. This single allegory should provide a window into your entire life. When done correctly, this story will communicate some combination of your values, your character, and your passion to the listener, without explicitly stating any of them. Use real stories from your past. Use these guidelines from Stephen Denning’s “The Leader’s Guide to Storytelling”:
    About -
    • A favorite place when you were young and what made it special to you 
    • How you overcame adversity or obstacle when you were young 
    • An incident with someone whom you admired or who influenced you 
    • The most significant thing that happened to you when you were young 
    With -
    • Relevance: Does it reflect the kind of person you are to the necessary audience? 
    • Clarity: Is your role in the story clear? Are your values reflected clearly in the story? 
    • Distinctiveness: Does the story indicate what is unique about you? 
    • Consistency: Is the story consistent with the way you conduct your life now? 
